NGREDIENTS FOR A CONSCIOUS THERAPEUTIC
ALLIANCE
The therapist and patient must create the ingredients for a conscious
therapeutic alliance in the following steps. If the therapist skips a single
step, the conscious therapeutic alliance will not be strong enough to achieve
the patient’s goals.
1. The patient describes an inner problem.
2. The patient declares her will to seek therapy.
3. The patient offers a specific example.
4. The patient and therapist agree on the patient’s internal conflict.
5. The patient and therapist agree on the therapeutic task to achieve the
patient’s positive goals.
a. The patient is willing to turn against her defenses.
b. The patient is willing to face what she fears.
c. The patient is willing to experience her feelings as deeply as
possible.
A patient with low resistance forms a therapeutic alliance quickly. A
moderately resistant patient’s defenses may emerge only after step five. A
highly resistant patient often puts up a barrier at steps one or two. A fragile
patient can flood with anxiety at steps one through four. Wherever obstacles
occur, resolve them before going further.
DECISION TREE
The decision tree in figure 6.1 illustrates the sequence of steps in
developing a therapeutic alliance as well as the most common detours. On
the left-hand side you will find the steps. On the right-hand side you will
find the most common detours that prevent the establishment of that
ingredient for the therapeutic alliance. When you are stuck with a patient,
see which ingredient is missing. Then look to the right-hand side to see
which defense is preventing you from forming the therapeutic alliance.
Figure 6.1 Decision tree for a conscious therapeutic alliance
OBSTACLES TO FORMING A CONSCIOUS
THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Obstacles to forming a conscious therapeutic alliance can occur at any
stage in the process: resistance to declaring an internal emotional problem,
resistance to declaring one’s will to work on that problem, resistance to
offering a specific example of the problem, or resistance to labeling a
feeling. We will now review a series of vignettes that illustrate these
resistances at each stage of developing a therapeutic alliance.
Resistance to Declaring an Internal Emotional Problem
Inquiry invites a close relationship, triggering feelings, anxiety, and
defenses. The pathway of anxiety discharge and type of defenses tell us
where the patient is on the spectrum of neurotic disorders. In fact, the
patient’s responses to the first questions during the phase of inquiry can let
us know if the patient has low, moderate, or high resistance or is fragile.
Th: What is the problem you would like me to help you with?
Low resistance patient: I’ve been feeling depressed ever since my
mother died. For some reason I haven’t been able to cry about her
death, even though I know I miss her terribly. [Clear answer
without defenses.]
Moderately resistant patient: I’m not sure really. [Defense: vagueness.]
Just a little down [Defense: minimization] for the last six months.
I’m not sure why. [Defense: vagueness.] Maybe it’s due to my
mom’s death. I just haven’t been the same since.” [Moderately
clear answer with some defenses.]
Highly resistant patient: I don’t have a problem. [Defense: denial.] My
wife thought I should be here. [Defense: projection. Defenses arise
immediately with no clear presenting problem and no will to
explore one.]
Fragile patient: I’m just really anxious. [Initial declaration of a
problem.] But I’m mostly afraid of the questions you want to ask.
[Defense: projection. Anxiety rises rapidly, leading to regressive
defenses. A fragmentary or disorganized answer reveals how the
rapid rise of anxiety interferes with her thinking. She forgets her
desire to tell the therapist about her difficulties. Rather than
tolerate her internal conflict of both wanting and not wanting to
talk, she projects her wish to talk onto the therapist and fears him.]
Patients’ responses allow us to assess the specific weaknesses and
defenses we need to treat. To illustrate this process of psychodiagnosis and
intervention, we will study a series of responses to our initial question in the
first session.
We ask, “What is the problem you would like me to help you with?”
The patient will respond in one of three ways by presenting
The problem for which he seeks treatment
High anxiety and symptoms
Defenses against declaring a problem
Vignette One: Low Resistance Patient
Notice in this example that the low resistance patient uses very few
defenses. We can begin exploring his problem right away.
Th: What’s the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: I’ve been feeling depressed lately, and I’m having trouble in my
relationship with my wife. [Describes his problem clearly.]
Intervention: Explore the patient’s problems to find out what conflicts
create his problems. “How long have you felt depressed?” “What
symptoms have you noticed?” “How severe has it been?” “You say
it started three months ago. What was going on in your life then?”
Once you have explored the depression, investigate other problems:
“Can you tell me what troubles you in the relationship with your
wife?”
Principle: Once the patient declares his problems clearly, explore them
to formulate the triangle of conflict (feeling, anxiety, and
defense) to learn which defenses create his symptoms
(depression and the poor relationship with his wife).
Vignette Two: Fragile Patient
Notice in this example that the fragile patient, rather than respond with
her problem, floods with anxiety. Thus, the therapist’s first task is to
regulate the patient’s anxiety so that exploring feelings can be done safely.
Th: What’s the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: There are so many things. I don’t know where to start. [Defense:
vagueness. Patient fidgets in her chair, and her eyes dart back and
forth rapidly as she avoids the therapist’s gaze: signs of anxiety and
projection.]
Th: How are you feeling right now? [Assess her anxiety.]
Pt: I’m anxious.
Th: Where do you notice feeling the anxiety in your body? [Assess her
anxiety.]
Pt: All over. [The rapid rise of anxiety shows she cannot regulate it.
Regulate the anxiety immediately.]
Th: Let’s notice in your body where the anxiety is. Do you notice any
anxiety in your stomach? [Draw attention to the anxiety first to
regulate it.]
Pt: I feel nauseous, like I’ll throw up. [Anxiety discharged into the
smooth muscles.]
The therapist’s invitation to a relationship immediately triggered
feelings and overwhelming anxiety.
Principle: Regulate overwhelming anxiety before focusing on the
patient’s declared internal problem. Then show the patient
what triggered the anxiety. “Do you notice that your anxiety
went up as soon as you said you want to open up? It’s as if an
alarm bell went off as soon as you declared that this is your
will. You want to open up in order to get to know yourself
better, so you have better information about yourself and that
feels a little risky.”
Let’s continue with this patient further.
Th: You’re feeling nauseous. It’s good you notice. That’s another sign of
anxiety. So isn’t it sad that as soon as you want to tell me what you
want me to help you with, this anxiety comes in to attack and
strangle you? As if it’s against the law for you to tell me what you
want help with. [Differentiate her wish to talk from the anxiety.
Describing something that attacks her helps her differentiate
herself from her anxiety.]
Pt: [Body relaxes.] That’s it. It’s like it’s against the law for me to talk
about me. [Now that she has differentiated herself from the
experience of anxiety, her anxiety drops.]
Th: As if it’s against the law for you to talk about you. So let me ask
you a question that may seem a bit odd: Is it your will to talk about
you? Is that what you want? [Mobilize her awareness of her will to
deactivate the projection of it onto the therapist.]
Pt: Yes, I want to talk about me. It’s just I get scared. [Now she sees
causality: talking about herself to the therapist triggers anxiety.]
Th: This is what you want? [Mobilize her awareness of her will to do
therapy.]
Pt: Yes. [With her will on-line, we can explore a sample problem.]
Inviting the fragile patient to describe her problems triggers feelings and
overwhelming anxiety. Identify her anxiety and the trigger: revealing
herself. Ask if she wants to talk about herself. Mobilize her will to engage
in the therapeutic task. Otherwise, a fragile patient projects her will onto
you and experiences your wish to do psychotherapy as if you are
persecuting her. Once she projects onto you, she will defy and oppose you.
Mobilize her awareness of her will to deactivate the projection onto you.
Then the two of you can join forces to pursue her goal together.
Whenever the patient experiences anxiety while expressing her will,
help her observe that sequence. Moment by moment, attend to her anxiety
and the triggers. Help her declare her internal problem and her wish for
therapy until they no longer trigger anxiety.
Principle: Do not inquire into the highly anxious patient’s inner world
until she declares an internal problem and her desire to
explore it with you. In the absence of a stated problem and
her wish for your help, you do not have her permission to do
therapy. By proceeding without the patient’s desire, you will
“create” a resistant patient. (To see how to develop an
alliance with a fragile patient, go to
http://istdpinstitute.com/dvds/ to purchase a psychotherapy
video of an initial session with a fragile patient.)
Vignette Three: Highly Resistant Patient
The highly resistant patient responds primarily with defenses. As a
result, the therapist must address the patient’s defenses against revealing a
problem.
Th: What’s the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: I don’t have a problem.” [Defense: denial.]
Principle: Without a declared internal emotional problem, you have no
permission to explore one. Confine yourself to mirroring back
contradictions in what he says or contradictions between
what he says and does.
Th: And yet you are here. [Point out the contradiction: a man without
psychological problems is in a psychologist’s office.]
Pt: That’s true, but it was my wife’s idea. [Defense: projection. He
attributes his desire for therapy to his wife. Patients who don’t want
to come to therapy won’t.]
Th: Although it was your wife’s idea, you came instead. [Point out the
contradiction between what he says and does.]
Pt: Because she thought it was a good idea. [Defense: projection—“My
wife had this thought, not I.”]
Th: In your opinion, you don’t have an internal emotional problem. This
was your wife’s idea, but you ended up following her idea instead
of your own. How does that come to pass? Is this something that
happens in your life? Do you find yourself doing one thing when
you want something else? [Point out the contradiction.]
Pt: I hadn’t thought of that. I do go along with what she says a lot of the
time. [Implicit admission of an internal problem.]
Th: A lot of the time you go along with her ideas instead of your own?
[Reflect his problem.]
Pt: Yeah. [Fidgets. Unconscious feelings trigger anxiety in the striated
muscles. Anxiety in the striated muscles needs no regulation.]
Th: As you said, that may not be a problem for you. [Mirror his
resistance to deactivate his defiance.] After all, you may have come
to regard this as normal and acceptable to go along with her ideas
instead of your own.
Pt: I don’t think it’s normal, so to speak [Slight turn against the
defense], but I have accepted it for quite a while. [Syntonicity: he is
willing to accept this problem.]
Th: Although, in your opinion, this doesn’t seem normal [reflect back
his awareness], you’re aware that you have accepted her ideas and
gone along with them but then have ignored your own. [Clarify his
defense of ignoring himself.]
Pt: I hadn’t thought of it that way, but it’s true [rise in awareness]. It’s
easier just to go along with her. [Rationalizes his defense of
ignoring himself.]
Th: In your opinion, this is not normal, but it has become the norm. It
has been easier for you to go along with her ideas than to stand up
for your own.
Pt: Now that you put it that way. It has been easier for me to go along
with her than to stand up for my own ideas. [He still has not said
this is a problem for him. We have no right to explore it yet.]
Th: It’s been easier for you to go along with her ideas than to stand up
for your own ideas. And that may be acceptable to you, to let go of
your ideas to keep the peace. [Mirror a resistant belief to deactivate
it.]
Pt: I don’t know that it’s really acceptable. It’s just that’s how I’ve
handled the situation. [Ignoring his point of view is becoming less
acceptable.]
Th: It’s not really acceptable to you. It’s just that over time not standing
up for yourself has become a habit.
Pt: Right. It’s been a habit.
Th: To act on her ideas but not act on yours.
Pt: That doesn’t sound too good. [The defense is becoming less
syntonic.]
Th: How so? [If the therapist agreed, the patient might argue. Instead,
invite the patient to describe his own dawning awareness of his
self-neglect.]
Pt: It doesn’t sound good that I don’t act on my ideas. I mean I know
that’s not right.
Th: You know it’s not right not to stand up for yourself. [Reinforce his
healthy awareness.] You know that. It’s just that you have gotten in
the habit of doing something that’s not right for you. [Show how his
defense of ignoring himself hurts him. This helps differentiate
himself from his defenses—how he treats himself.]
Pt: Yes. There have been some things I wanted to do and I didn’t do
them because my wife thought it wasn’t a good idea. [He reveals
how his defense creates problems for him. We are closer to a
consensus on his internal conflict.]
Th: Ignoring what you want may please your wife. But it doesn’t always
please you. [Point out the price of this defense: he is not pleased.]
Pt: That’s for sure. There are all kinds of things I haven’t done. [More
aware of the defense’s price.]
Th: Ignoring what you want has led to some disappointment. [Point out
the price of his defense.]
Pt: Yeah. That’s been a problem [finally declares an internal problem:
he ignores his feelings and desires] because I end up arguing with
my wife about this.
Th: It sounds like ignoring your feelings and desires is a problem.
[Reinforce his healthy awareness.] And that leads you into
arguments with your wife. But it sounds like, in spite of the
arguments, you find you don’t listen to your desires or act on them.
[Point out how the defense of arguing does not solve his problem.
He blames his wife for what he does: ignoring what he wants.]
Pt: That’s true. No matter how much I argue with her, I don’t get what I
want. [He doesn’t yet connect this result to ignoring what he
wants.]
Th: When she ignores what you want, you do too. And when you ignore
your desires, you don’t get the results you want. [His defense, not
his wife, causes his problems.]
Pt: I hadn’t thought of that before. If I ignore what I want, I won’t get
what I want. [An intrapsychic focus: his actions create his
problems.]
Th: Is that something you would like to change so you get more of what
you want? [Invite him to turn against the defenses and engage in
the therapeutic task.]
Pt: Yeah, because I’m really frustrated.
Typical of many highly resistant patients, this man responded with
defenses rather than describe an internal problem. Since this type of patient
can irritate the therapist, therapists often make the mistake of confronting
the patient prematurely before the patient can see and differentiate himself
from his defenses. As a result, the therapist should abide by the following
principles when working with a highly resistant patient who does not yet
see his defenses.
Principle One: Do not explore a problem with the patient until he
declares one that he wants to explore with you.
Principle Two: Address splitting and projection by noting
contradictions within the patient’s statements or contradictions
between what he says and does.
Principle Three: Acknowledge any healthy shifts the patient makes
toward collaboration.
Principle Four: Mirror the patient’s level of resistance. Do not
challenge defenses he does not see. When you challenge the patient
prematurely or assume he is willing to explore a problem before he
is, you are relating to the patient in your mind, not the one who is
before you. Your resistance to dealing with the patient you have will
make him more resistant to you.
Obstacle to Declaring an Internal Emotional Problem: Externalization
Sometimes patients believe other people, not their defenses, cause their
suffering. This external focus prevents an internal focus in therapy. For
example, the patient may say, “I don’t have a problem. My wife is the
problem.”
The patient who does not see the defenses creating his problems
believes other people create them. He invites you to engage in “sociology,”
observing other people, rather than psychology, looking into himself. The
patient asks you to do psychotherapy “by proxy”: “Don’t treat me. Treat my
wife, who is not here.” Therapy with a patient who is in the room can be
difficult, but treating an invisible patient is impossible!
When patients externalize, first help them develop an internal focus.
Without looking at a patient’s inner life, we cannot do psychotherapy. Let’s
look at some examples that show how to help the externalizing patient shift
from blaming others for his problems so he can recognize how he causes his
own suffering.
Th: What’s the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: I’m hoping you can help me with my wife because she is my biggest
problem. [The patient believes his problem is his wife, not how he
deals with his feelings. He invites you to treat her.]
Th: Since she’s not here, I can’t help her. [Note the reality. Then invite
an internal focus.] I wonder what the internal problem is you
would like me to help you with?
Pt: That’s the thing. I don’t think I have a problem. It’s my wife that’s
the problem. And I’m hoping you can help me deal with her.
Th: You are having trouble dealing with your wife. [Implicit statement
of a problem.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: Can you give me an example of where you are having a problem in
dealing with your wife? [Explore his problem to develop an
intrapsychic focus.]
Pt: Like today, I was going to come here on time. She was hung over
and asked me to wait for her. She wanted a lift to the hairdresser,
but then she made me wait for her. She made me late, and we got
into an argument. [He chose to wait, be late, and suffer, but he
blames his wife for his choices. He does not see his defenses of
externalization and blaming.]
Th: She was late. [Mirror back the reality so the patient can see how he
made himself late.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: And she asked you to wait and make yourself late.
Pt: Yes, and I hate when she does that.
Th: So when she asked you to wait, you decided to wait. [Reflect the
facts we can agree on, and include the element of choice: how he
made himself late.]
Pt: Right.
Th: You decided to wait, and by doing so, you made yourself late.
[Show causality. His choice to wait made him late, not his wife. As
long as he blames her for his choice, we will not establish an
intrapsychic focus. He punishes himself and makes himself late to
deal with feelings he has when his wife is late. Addressing
externalization helps the patient regain an internal locus of control
and hope that he can solve his problems.]
Pt: She asked me to!
Th: That makes sense. She wanted you to wait. So you decided to wait
and made yourself late, but then you blamed her for your decision
to make yourself late. [Differentiate her request from his choice to
hurt himself by making himself late.]
Pt: But she asked me to!
Th: Of course! That’s what she wanted. Then you had two options: to
say no to yourself and make yourself late or to say yes to yourself
and come on time. You chose to say no to yourself, but then you
blamed her for the choice you made. [Point out his defense: “I
didn’t punish myself; my wife punished me.”]
Pt: I hadn’t seen that before. [Now he can see his defense rather than
blame his wife.]
Th: Is that a pattern for you, to say no to yourself, to deprive yourself in
that way? [Invite the patient to see the price of his defenses.]
Pt: I do blame her a lot for when we are late. [He sees his behavior but
not its defensive function: “If I can blame her, I don’t have to face
how I cause my suffering.”]
Th: You blame her a lot when you decide to be late together with her.
[Clarify the defense of externalization.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: Would you like to know what’s driving that pattern of selfdeprivation? [Invite him to focus on the feelings, anxiety, and
defenses that create his presenting problems—arguments and a
poor relationship with himself and his wife.]
Pt: Yes. [Intrapsychic focus: the patient sees that his defenses, not his
wife, create his suffering.]
Undo the patient’s externalization to establish an internal focus. The
patient who externalizes creates an external locus of control: “My wife
controls my life and creates my problems.” Thus, he believes therapy
cannot help him. “If my wife creates my problems, my therapy won’t
change her, so I have no hope for therapy.” Help him see the internal locus
of control: “It’s not my wife but my defenses that create my problems.”
Now therapy makes sense: “I can take a stand against these defenses to
make different choices.” Hope is reborn when he realizes he can see and let
go of the defenses that create his suffering.
Obstacle to Declaring an Internal Emotional Problem: Vagueness
In this example, you will see why it is important to address vagueness as
a defense against describing a presenting problem. Do not explore any
problem if the problem or example is vague. When the problem is vague,
you cannot find out what the triangle of conflict is.
Th: What’s the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: I’ve just been feeling in a bad mood. [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: Can you be more specific?
Pt: Not really, I just don’t feel so hot. [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: What is going on in your life to trigger that?
Pt: I don’t know. I think it’s just my life in general. [Defense:
vagueness.]
Th: I hear you have a bad mood, and you think it’s your life in general,
but this is vague. Could you be more specific? [Point out the
defense.]
Pt: Yesterday I had a crying jag when I got home from work.
Th: What was going on at work that could have triggered that?
Pt: I don’t know if it was anything at work. I just feel tired when I get
home. [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: You had a crying jag at home yesterday and were tired. What
happened earlier that could have triggered that crying jag?
Pt: I talked to my boss, but I don’t think it was that. [Defense: denial.]
Th: What did you and your boss talk about?
Pt: He said he was going to have to let me go because they are
downsizing. [Stimulus.]
Th: What is your feeling toward him for saying that?
Pt: I just feel down. [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: Feeling “down” is vague. If you don’t cover the feeling with
vagueness, what is the feeling toward him for firing you? [Point out
the defense and focus on the warded-off feeling.]
Pt: I was angry. Well, not angry exactly. [Defense: undoing.]
Th: You just said “angry.” Do you notice how you start to take it back?
Pt: Well, I’m not sure. [Defense: indecision.]
Th: You say angry; then you take it back and cover the anger with
indecision. Do you notice how you cover the anger toward your
boss by getting a bit indecisive? [Point out defenses.]
Pt: Yes, but now I don’t have a job! [Starts to tear up.]
Th: Do you notice how these tears come in to cover up your anger?
Pt: But I feel sad.
Th: And you feel angry, but we can see now you feel angry with your
boss. Then you cover the anger with indecision and sadness. I
wonder if the crying jag was a way to cover up your anger at your
boss. [Clarify the function of the defense.]
Pt: I think I do that a lot.
The patient presents her problem in such a vague way we cannot get a
clear idea of her problem or its trigger. Focus on the defense of vagueness
until a clear picture of the problem emerges. To explore the “down” feeling
would not make sense until we know where it fits on the triangle of conflict.
Obstacle to Declaring an Internal Emotional Problem: Projection
The highly resistant patient often uses projection to avoid declaring a
problem to work on in therapy. This vignette illustrates how to block
projections to maintain a consistent focus on the presenting problem.
Th: What’s the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: My husband and I are having lots of arguments, and my psychiatrist
suggested I see you to deal with my issues. [Defense: projection
onto the psychiatrist.]
Th: I understand that was your psychiatrist’s idea, but what is the
internal emotional problem with which you would like me to help
you? [Block the projection.]
Pt: The arguments with my husband. [Defense: said diffidently.]
Th: How are the arguments a problem for you? [Assess whether this is a
problem for her.]
Pt: He is always going on about wanting more sex, and I’m not
interested.
Th: You are not interested in more sex, but I’m not sure how this is a
problem for you.
Pt: I thought you would think it is a problem. [Defense: projection.]
Th: If it’s not a problem for you, I have no right to explore it. [Block the
projection.] That’s why I’m wondering what the problem is you
want me to help you with.
Pt: I don’t know. I mean I would like it if we didn’t argue so much.
Th: How is that a problem for you?
Pt: I just wish he would just leave me alone. [This is an externalizing
focus. “The problem is him, not how I deal with my feelings.”]
Th: That’s what you want him to do, but it’s still not clear how the
arguments are a problem for you.
Pt: I get so angry.
Th: How is that a problem for you?
Pt: When I get really angry, I throw things.
Th: Mm-hmm.
Pt: And sometimes I yell at our four-year-old son.
Th: Sometimes this rage at your husband is directed at your four-yearold son instead.
Pt: Yes.
Th: And is that something you want to get a handle on?
Pt: Yes, because he doesn’t deserve it. [First declaration of an internal
problem.]
Th: So something happens with your husband that triggers a lot of rage.
One way you deal with it is to yell at your son. And you would like
some help in figuring out what is going on underneath this rage so
your son doesn’t have to suffer the results. [Summarize the triangle
of conflict to see if we have consensus on the conflict and the task.]
Pt: Yes.
In this case, the patient presents something that troubles others but not
her. So we have no right to explore the disputes. Clarify how the presenting
difficulty is a problem for her. Otherwise, we cannot establish a therapeutic
alliance.
COMMON NONPROBLEMS
When the therapist asks the patient what the problem is he wants help
for in therapy, the patient may claim he has no problem, as we have seen.
But sometimes the patient may offer something that is not a problem or is
not a problem for the patient. If the therapist does not recognize a
nonproblem, he may explore it only to run into a dead end.
Vignette One: Nonpsychological Problem
Patients can avoid revealing an internal emotional problem by revealing
something that is either not a problem for the patient or a problem outside
the therapist’s expertise. This vignette reveals how to block this defense and
maintain an effective therapeutic focus on an internal emotional problem.
Remember: without the patient’s declaration of an internal emotional
problem, we have no right to attempt therapy.
Th: What is the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: My wife wants a divorce.
Th: How is that a problem for you?
Pt: I’m not sure that it is, to be honest. I’ve been fed up with her.
Th: It’s not clear if this divorce is really a problem for you.
Pt: It is.
Th: How so?
Pt: It’s going to cost me a lot of money. [Nonproblem psychologically
speaking.]
Th: Of course, but as a therapist, I can’t help you with the financial
problem. [Point out the reality.] I wonder what the emotional
problem is you would like me to help you with.
Pt: Emotional problem? Well, I have been yelling at my daughter quite
a bit. [For the first time, he indicates that something he does creates
a problem for him.]
Th: How is that a problem for you?
Pt: I think it’s making her afraid of me, and I don’t want that to happen
because my wife is moving out of town and she’ll have custody of
my daughter. [He declares an internal emotional problem.]
Vignette Two: People Pleasing by Not Having a Problem
Sometimes patients are afraid to depend on others for help. As a result,
they may try to please the therapist by presenting as if they do not have a
problem. Block this defense as quickly as possible so the patient can begin
to see her need to depend and her fear of doing so.
Th: What’s the problem with which you would like me to help you?
Pt: I’m doing really well this week. Everything’s going well. I haven’t
had any upsets this week. Everything has been fine since my boss is
out of town on a business trip. And my boyfriend has been on his
best behavior. So I’m actually feeling just fine. [Racing speech and
gaze avoidance indicate anxiety and defense.]
The patient says she is fine to avoid revealing a desire for help. After
the patient’s second sentence, the therapist could say, “I’m glad things are
going so well. Yet since you are here, what is the problem you would like
me to help you with?” Here, the therapist could block her defense and
return the focus to the problem. Or the therapist could focus on the patient’s
racing speech: “I’m glad everything is going well. I notice your speech is
racing, which is often a sign of anxiety. Are you aware of feeling anxious
right now?” In this case, the therapist might focus on regulating the anxiety
if it appeared to be too high.
RESISTANCE TO DECLARING ONE’S WILL TO WORK
ON THE PROBLEM
Often a patient becomes hesitant or passive as soon as you explore the
problem he wants to resolve in therapy. You are exploring, but he is not.
Mobilize his will to the task to co-create the therapeutic alliance.
Asking him to declare his will to engage in therapy invites greater
emotional intimacy. This invitation, based on his relational history, triggers
unconscious feelings, anxiety, and defenses against emotional closeness.
Address those defenses until the patient can own his desire for treatment
rather than project it onto others. He must become aware sequentially of (1)
his will to engage in therapy, (2) how he experiences his will, and (3) the
feelings, anxiety, and defenses triggered by his will to engage in the task.
He must acknowledge his wish for treatment and his goals (Kenny 1998),
so he can achieve them (Ainslie 2001). This gives him enhanced selfcontrol (Elster 1999, 2000).
Some neuroscientists propose that our experience of will is illusory
because neural activation occurs before consciousness (Wegner 2002). Yet
illusions about perception do not lead us to discard the concept of
perception. So these illusions should not lead us to dismiss the concept of
free will (Schulkin 2007; Sternberg 2010). Will has both conscious and
unconscious dimensions, like all aspects of our inner life. Obviously,
nonconscious brain activation precedes any conscious activity. As Grawe
(2007, 106) pointed out, “If I regard the preparatory, unconscious processes
as a part of myself, just as much as my conscious experience, then it is still
me that makes decisions. My Self—my personality—consists of implicit
(unconscious) and explicit (conscious) aspects. My volitional decisions are
not forced upon me by some external agent.”
Our emphasis on will is similar to that in Buddhist mindfulness practice.
According to the Buddha, you “own” your will. You are free to use it and to
receive the results of your efforts (Schwartz and Begley 2002, 303). In
therapy and Buddhism, the quality of the patient’s attention determines her
awareness and what she wills. The choice to pay attention is “the essential
phenomenon of will” (W. James quoted by Schwartz and Begley 2002,
317).
The choice to pay attention to feelings rewires and changes the brain.
“Moment by moment we choose and sculpt how our ever-changing minds
will work, we choose who we will be …, and these choices are left
embossed in physical form on our material selves” (Merzenich and
deCharms 1996, 77).
Vignette One: A Patient Who Has Already Declared a Problem
In this vignette, we will see how to help a patient who has declared a
problem but does not want to work on it. The therapist must be alert to any
signs that the patient is reluctant, and then mobilize the patient’s will to
engage in the therapeutic task.
Th: Can you tell me more about this problem with your wife?
Pt: I’m not sure how important it is. [Defense: minimization. Lack of
will to explore his declared problem with the therapist.]
Th: You mentioned this problem with your wife. Is it your will to look
at this problem? [Invite the patient to declare his will.]
Pt: I think so. [Defense: hypothetical speech and a detached voice.]
Th: You seem uncertain. Do you notice that? [Point out the defense.]
Are you sure you want to look at this problem? [Invite the patient’s
will until he declares it without anxiety or defenses.]
Pt: I know I’m supposed to. [Defense: projection of will onto others.]
Th: But do you want to? [Block the projection of will.]
Pt: That’s the thing. I’m not sure I really want to look at it. [Defense:
defiance. The patient projects his will onto the therapist, and then
defies the therapist as the repository of the patient’s will.]
Th: That’s okay. I have no right to help you with this problem with your
wife if you don’t want to look at it. I’m here to help you with what
you want. And if you don’t want me to help you with that problem,
I have no right to try. [Deactivating the projection of will onto the
therapist deactivates the defiance that the projection creates.]
Pt: Hmm. I thought you would pursue this because I thought you would
think it was important. [He sees how he projects his will onto the
therapist.]
Th: I have no right to pursue this if it’s not important to you and if you
don’t want to. So do you want to explore this conflict with your
wife? [Deactivate the projection of will and then ask about his will
to engage in the therapeutic task.]
Pt: Well, it is important. [He still does not declare his will.]
Th: Although it is important to you, it still may not be something you
want to explore. [Reflect the conflict between his wish to explore
and his resistance to doing so.]
Pt: I’d like to resolve this problem with my wife. [Defense: detached
voice. Verbally, he moves forward, but nonverbally he resists.]
Th: Are you sure? [Invite him to declare his will.]
Pt: Yes. [Defense: said in a detached voice.]
Th: You don’t sound sure. How do you experience that inside—that you
know you want this? That this isn’t simply someone else’s idea but
yours? How do you experience inside that you know this is what
you want? [As long as he does not experience his desire, he projects
it onto someone else.]
Pt: [Sits up, looks more alert and involved.] I can’t go on this way.
[Defense. We see him experience his will nonverbally, but we don’t
hear it yet verbally.]
Th: How do you experience inside that you want to explore this here
with me? [Invite him to declare his will.]
Pt: [Facial expression becomes more serious.] I want to get to the
bottom of this once and for all.
Principle: Focus on the patient’s will until he is emotionally committed
to engaging in therapy. Then we can explore his conflict
collaboratively.
Vignette Two: A Fragile Patient Who Has Declared a Problem
Often, fragile patients become anxious when they reveal a problem and
suffer from cognitive/perceptual disruption. They can forget that it was their
will to look inside themselves in therapy. Instead, they project their will
onto the therapist and fear the therapist. In this example, you will learn how
to identify and deactivate the projection of will so the patient owns her will
to engage in therapy.
Th: Would you like to take a look at this conflict with your husband?
[Mobilize the patient’s will to the task.]
Pt: I’m not sure. [Defense: indecision.]
Th: Some hesitance is here. Do you notice? [Point out the patient’s
defense.]
Pt: [Nods.]
Th: Was it your will to come here today? [Invite her to declare her will.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: Was there a problem that you wanted help with?
Pt: Yes.
Th: And do you want help for that problem? [Invite her to declare her
will.]
Pt: Yes, I just am afraid of what we’ll get into. [Her speech races and
she fidgets: signs of a sharp rise in anxiety. Declaring her will
triggers anxiety.]
Th: You seem anxious. Are you aware of feeling anxious? [Mobilize her
attention to the anxiety to regulate it and head off regressive
defenses that arise in response to a sharp rise of anxiety.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: Where do you notice feeling this anxiety?
Pt: In my head, in my arms. I have some trouble breathing, and my
stomach doesn’t feel too good. [Signs of anxiety in the striated and
smooth muscles.]
Th: On the one hand, there’s this anxiety that comes up in your body,
and on the other hand, there’s your will to explore. Do you notice
how just telling me what you want triggers this anxiety, as if it’s
against the law for you to say what you want? [Differentiate her
will (trigger) from the anxiety, help her observe herself.]
Pt: [Settles down into her chair, less anxious. Nods.]
Th: It’s as if it’s against the law for you to say what you want, as if the
police come in and Taser you with anxiety just for saying what you
want out of this therapy.
Pt: That’s it.
Th: If we put that anxiety off to the side, is this what you want—to
explore this conflict with your husband? Do you want to know what
you are feeling under the anxiety so you have better information
about you? [Mobilize her will to her goal.]
Pt: Yes, I want to. [Becomes anxious.]
Th: What do you notice happening in you right now? [Mobilize her
attention to her anxiety and causality: her will to reveal herself
triggers anxiety.]
Pt: I’m getting anxious.
Th: Isn’t that interesting? You got anxious as soon as you said, “Yes,
that’s what I want to do.” Then this anxiety comes in to inhibit you
as soon as you express what you want. Do you notice that? [Show
causality.]
Pt: I have a hard time saying what I want. [She can observe this
sequence without flooding with anxiety or resorting automatically
to defense.]
Th: Isn’t that interesting? Saying what you want triggers this anxiety
that inhibits you. What’s that like to step back and observe these
two elements: your will and this anxiety? [Mobilize her awareness
of two things at once: build her capacity to observe and tolerate
internal conflict.]
Pt: It’s weird.
Th: It really is, isn’t it? It’s weird to begin to notice how expressing
what you want is one thing, and this anxiety is another. If we go
back, how do you experience this want as yours? How do you feel
that in your body? [Separate her will from her anxiety, and then
invite her to pay attention to her will and how she experiences it.]
Pt: I know I should talk about it. My doctor told me to. [Defense:
projection of will. Block the projection and focus on the patient’s
experience of her will.]
Th: That’s what he thinks, but how do you, in your opinion, feel this
inside as your desire? [Block the projection of will and invite her
experience of her will.]
Pt: [Sits up and looks at the therapist.] Because I want a better
relationship than my parents had. I don’t want my daughter to
suffer like I did. [With this implicit rise of will in her body and her
verbal declaration, we can explore her conflicts. Each later
declaration of will to reveal herself more deeply may trigger
feelings and anxiety, leading to cognitive/perceptual disruption. If
so, show causality and regulate the anxiety before going further.]
RESISTANCE TO EXPLORING A SPECIFIC EXAMPLE OF
AN INTERNAL EMOTIONAL PROBLEM
Once the patient has declared his will to explore an internal emotional
problem, ask, “Can we look at a specific example of where this depression
is a problem for you?”
Often, patients use defenses to avoid declaring a specific example of the
problem they want to explore. The types of defense and pathway of anxiety
discharge tell us what type of character structure the patient has.
Low Resistance Patient
A low resistance patient usually reveals a specific example readily
without using defenses.
Pt: Yes. It’s had a terrible impact on my marriage. I haven’t wanted to
go out with my wife, and I can tell she is resenting me for wanting
to stay at home and not go out. It happened just last night.
Psychodiagnosis: The patient gives a clear answer without anxiety or
defense.
Intervention: Explore a specific example of where his depression affects
his marriage.
Moderately Resistant Patient
A moderately resistant patient will use repressive and tactical defenses.
Once we point out those defenses, however, the patient will readily offer a
specific example of his problem.
Pt: I get depressed a lot.
Psychodiagnosis: The patient does not give a clear example but
acknowledges he has a problem.
Intervention: Block the defense of vagueness and maintain a focus on a
specific example.
Th: Can we take a look at a specific example that triggered your
depression?
Pt: It started after my boss fired me on my last job. [Blocking the
defense allowed the patient to present a clear example.]
Highly Resistant Patient
A highly resistant patient responds with a defense rather than with a
specific example of the problem. We must help the patient see the defense
and its price so he will let go of the defense and offer a specific example of
his problem instead. Remember: without a specific example of the problem,
we cannot explore the triangle of conflict to get consensus on what causes
the patient’s problem.
Pt: I can’t think of a specific example.
Psychodiagnosis: The patient does not give an example of his problem.
He does not see his defense.
Intervention: Help the patient see his defense.
Th: Do you notice you have a hard time giving me a specific example?
[Point out the defense.]
Pt: That’s just it. When people ask me things, I just come up with
nothing. [He invites the therapist to have a relationship where the
therapist asks for information and the patient withholds what is
necessary to do therapy.]
Th: I understand. It’s just that as long as we don’t have a specific
example of this problem, then obviously I wouldn’t be able to help
you with it. [Point out the price of the defense.]
Pt: But I really can’t come up with a specific example. [Defense.]
Th: If you can’t come up with a specific example though, we won’t be
able to get a clear picture of your difficulty. Then I won’t be able to
help you. [Point out the price of his defense.]
Pt: It happens all the time. [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: But a specific example?
Pt: It’s something that goes on a lot. [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: “Goes on a lot” is vague. Can we look at a specific example?
Pt: Like with my mother, it happens every time I visit. [Defense:
generalization.]
Th: Can we take a look at a specific example where you become
depressed when you visit your mother?
Pt: It happened just yesterday. [Patient begins to describe a specific
example.]
Principle: Keep your focus, blocking and labeling defenses, until the
patient gives a specific example.
Fragile Patient
The fragile patient will use repressive defenses until her anxiety rises
over the threshold of anxiety tolerance. At that point, the patient begins to
suffer from cognitive/perceptual disruption. The therapist must regulate the
patient’s anxiety first, and then ask again for a specific example.
Pt: It happens all the time. I don’t think there’s a specific trigger. [Sign
that the patient is unaware of the stimulus, the feeling that is
triggered, her anxiety, or her defense.]
Th: Can we take a look at an example where you remember becoming
depressed so we can see what is triggering this crippling
depression?
Pt: I was very depressed yesterday.
Th: When did it start?
Pt: I think it started as soon as I woke up.
Th: Could we look at what happened the day before?
Pt: Nothing much really. [Defense: denial and ignoring of stimuli.]
Th: What happened?
Pt: I got up as usual and did some last-minute revision of my
presentation. I went to the art school and gave my presentation as a
form of performance art. The professor said in front of the group
that it was the worst presentation he had ever seen. Other students
were shocked by what he said and talked to me afterward. Then
after school I went to my part-time job. [She presents the stimulus
and then ignores its importance and her reactive feelings.]
Th: You mention that the professor said it was the worst presentation he
had ever seen. What’s the feeling toward him for saying that?
Pt: [Blank look.] I’m sorry. What did you say?
Th: Did your mind blank out just now?
Pt: Yeah, that happens a lot.
Th: That’s a sign of anxiety. As soon as I ask what the feeling is toward
your professor, you get anxious, and your mind conks out. Do you
see that now?
Pt: Now that you point it out.
Th: It sounds like there is some feeling toward the professor that makes
you anxious.
Pt: My friends said they were angry. [Defense: projection.]
Th: And you? Do you share that reaction with them? [Block the
projection.]
Pt: I mean he’s a really arrogant guy. [Defense: rationalization.]
Th: Are you aware of feeling angry with him?
Pt: Yes, I can see that now. [Progress: she feels her anger without
suffering cognitive/perceptual disruption.]
We would explore this example so she could see how she turned her
anger toward the professor onto herself and became depressed. Fragile and
highly resistant patients often ignore events that trigger their feelings. As a
result, they don’t know what causes their symptoms. Explore events
preceding a rise in symptoms to discover the stimulus to the feelings.
RESISTANCE TO DECLARING A POSITIVE GOAL
There is a saying that if you do not know where you want to go, you
will probably get there. Likewise, in therapy we need to know the positive
goals the patient wants to achieve through therapy. Without the patient’s
positive goals, he will have no motivation to engage in the therapeutic task.
Thus, before exploring feelings and conflicts deeply with the patient, make
sure you and the patient have agreed on the positive goals the therapy is
designed to achieve.
However, the patient may have difficulty declaring a positive goal for
therapy. If so, the therapist must assess what prevents the patient from
declaring a positive goal and help the patient overcome that barrier.
Otherwise, the therapist and patient will not be able to develop a therapeutic
alliance.
Patients can have trouble declaring a positive goal due to a transference
resistance, a failure to see causality, or long-term depression that has left the
patient feeling depleted or hopeless. The following examples show how to
help these patients declare a positive goal.
Transference Resistance
Some patients may resist presenting positive goals as part of a
transference resistance. The patient, by not providing a positive goal, may
be inviting the therapist to present the positive goals. Then the patient
reluctantly goes along at best or opposes the therapist at worst.
In this example, the patient has just described a situation in which he
gives people what they want, even though by doing so, he cheats himself.
Afterward, he becomes angry with them for “exploiting” him, blaming them
for his choice to abandon his own interests.
Th: You see that you sacrificed yourself but blamed them for your
choice. Would you like us to take a look at that so we can help you
give up this pattern of exploiting yourself? [Mobilize the patient to
the therapeutic task.]
Pt: I’m sixty-two years old. It’s too late for me to change. Maybe I
should give up. [Invitation to a passive transference resistance: “I
will give up and ask you, the therapist, to take responsibility for my
therapy by breathing hope into me.”]
Th: Shall we give up now? [Block the transference resistance.]
Pt: [Looks up surprised.] Are you saying I should give up? [Defense:
projection.]
Th: You said you should give up. I’m just asking if we should stop now
so you can give up.
Pt: No, I’ve got to turn this around. If I give up now, things won’t
change.
Failure to See Causality
When patients do not see how their defenses create their presenting
problems, they assume something else does: spouses, other people, life, or
fate. “Why do bad things keep happening to me?” “It’s just one damned
thing after another.” “I think it’s just my fate.” “Life sucks, what can I say?”
“I think it’s my karma to suffer in this lifetime.”
Since they attribute their suffering to external forces, they feel hopeless.
If they do not see causality, do not confront their hopelessness as a defense.
If they believe other people or fate cause their problems, they should feel
hopeless. Help patients see causality. Once they recognize how things they
do (defenses) create their problems, they regain an internal locus of control
and can feel hope again.
Th: You see that you sacrificed yourself but blamed them for your
choice. Would you like us to take a look at that so we can help you
give up this pattern of exploiting yourself ?
Pt: It feels so hopeless. They will never care about what I want.
[Defense: projection. He does not care enough about what he
wants.]
Th: They should care about what you want. Is that true?
Pt: Yes. They should. [Defense: denial in fantasy. Rather than relate to
reality (they do not care more about what he wants than what they
want), he relates to his fantasy of how reality “should” be.]
Th: Is that true?
Pt: Yes. Are you saying they shouldn’t care about what I want?
Th: People who don’t care about what you want should care about what
you want. Is that true? [Identify the defense of denial in fantasy.]
Pt: Yes. Don’t you agree?
Th: Reality should be what reality is not. Is that true? [Mirror his
denial.]
Pt: It should! [Defense: denial in fantasy.]
Th: You say reality should be your way, but then reality keeps on being
what it is. It must be hard to be having this fight with reality.
Pt: It is.
Th: Do you notice how when you fight reality, reality always wins?
[Point out the price of denial.]
Pt: Yes, but shouldn’t they care about my needs? [Defense: denial in
fantasy.]
Th: No. That’s not their job. They should care about their needs.
Pt: I think they should also care about mine.
Th: That’s your job. You should care about your needs, but you ask
other people to do your job.
Pt: But they should!
Th: If you don’t care about your needs, if you don’t pay attention to
them, why should they?
Pt: But they ask me to ignore my needs.
Th: And you can say, “No, I will pay attention to my needs” or “Yes. I
will ignore my needs.” And you let me know you ignore your needs
but blame others for your choice.
Pt: I hadn’t thought of it this way before.
A patient who uses the defenses of externalization and denial in fantasy
feels hopeless about the possibility for personal change. Once he sees his
defenses, he can turn against them and create a better life.
Depression
A depressed patient often presents with negative rather than positive
goals for therapy. Do not proceed until the patient has declared some
positive goals for the therapy. This vignette shows how to persist with a
depressed patient, blocking defenses until the patient can declare a positive
goal.
Th: What would you like me to help you with?
Pt: I don’t want to feel depressed. [Negative goal.]
Th: What do you want to feel instead? [Mobilize the patient’s awareness
of a positive goal.]
Pt: I just don’t want to feel like a constant failure. [Negative goal.]
Th: If this therapy is successful, what do you want to feel instead?
[Mobilize the patient’s awareness of a positive goal.]
Pt: I don’t know. I’ve always felt depressed. [No one has ever felt
depressed every single second of his life. This statement reveals that
the patient cannot remember any experiences right now that are
incongruent with his depressed state. This illustrates how memory
can be state dependent: a depressed patient remembers only
depressing memories.]
Th: But it sounds like you want to feel something different.
Pt: Yeah.
Th: How do you want to be different? How will we know we have
succeeded?
Pt: I won’t be depressed. [Negative goal.]
Th: What will you feel instead?
Pt: I’ll feel like getting up in the morning.
Th: You’ll feel like getting up in the morning. How else will you feel?
Pt: I won’t feel sad. [Negative goal.]
Th: What will you feel instead?
Pt: I wouldn’t say happy but maybe content.
Some chronically depressed patients cannot formulate a positive goal
for the therapy. Instead, they ruminate about negative goals (things they
want to avoid). Negative goals mobilize their avoidance system (Grawe
2007), triggering anxiety, defenses, and resistance. Negative goals cannot
be the basis for a therapeutic alliance. Interrupt depressive rumination to
prevent depression in a session. Then focus on the positive goals the patient
wants to achieve.
To do so, ask questions such as these:
“When this therapy succeeds, how will you know? How will you be
different?”
“You mention feeling depressed, detached, and unengaged in
relationships now as we begin the therapy. How do you want to be
different when we end? For instance, instead of being detached in
relationships, what’s the healthy alternative you want to be instead?”
“You said you don’t want to feel depressed. That tells us what you
don’t want to feel. What do you want to feel instead?”
When you ask the patient for his positive goals, he can respond with
1. Positive goals
2. Anxiety and symptoms
3. Defenses
Response One: Patient makes a declaration of a positive goal.
Pt: I want to feel happy instead of depressed. I want to respect myself
instead of being down on myself, and I want to have more intimacy
in my relationships.
Intervention: Reflect back the patient’s positive goal to ensure mutual
understanding and to mobilize the approach system. With the
patient’s will and goal mobilized, explore a specific example.
Th: You want to feel happy instead of depressed. You want to respect
yourself instead of being down on yourself, and to be more intimate
in relationships instead of detached.
Pt: Yes.
Th: You’ve told me that when you have feelings in a relationship, you
get anxious and then deal with feelings and intimacy by detaching
and avoiding. If you like, we could help you face those feelings and
get to the bottom of them so that instead of detaching from your
feelings and from your partners you could be intimate, and instead
of avoiding emotional connections and becoming lonely you could
form closer relationships. [Outline the therapeutic task: face
feelings and turn against defenses to overcome her symptoms and
achieve her goals.] Is that something you would like to do? [Enlist
the patient’s will to engage in the therapeutic task.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: Can we take a look at a specific example where this conflict around
intimacy came up for you? [Invite her to focus on a specific
example of the conflict.]
Response Two: Patient immediately is flooded with anxiety or
symptoms occur.
Pt: I want to feel happy instead of depressed. [Tension goes out of the
patient’s muscles as she becomes limp, a sign of rising anxiety.]
Th: What do you notice feeling right now?
Pt: Tired.
Th: Does it feel like a good tired like after exercising, or does it feel like
a sick tired?
Pt: Like a sick tired.
Th: That’s a sign of anxiety. Are you aware of feeling anxious right
now?
Pt: I feel sick to my stomach, but I have stomach problems.
Th: Being sick to your stomach is a sign of very high anxiety. Did you
notice what triggered your anxiety just now?
Pt: No.
Th: You mentioned that you want to feel happy and then suddenly
became anxious. [Point out causality.] Does it feel a little scary to
declare a positive goal here with me? [Invite her to observe
causality.]
Pt: [Becomes tense. Shifts in chair.] Yes, it does feel scary.
Th: It feels a little scary to form a positive goal for you, to take your
side. [Point out causality.]
Pt: Yes, a lot scary.
Th: Now that you can observe that sequence and you can observe the
anxiety in your body, how is your stomach?
Pt: It feels better now, not so jumpy. [Pointing out causality regulates
the patient’s anxiety.]
The patient’s expression of positive goals or desires often triggers
anxiety or defenses. Identify the anxiety when it is in the forefront, and help
the patient pay attention to it for self-regulation. Then help the patient see
causality: declaring a positive goal or her will triggers anxiety. Many fragile
patients were punished as children for expressing what they wanted. Thus,
expressing their will and desire triggers unconscious anxiety.
Response Three: Patient uses defenses.
Pt: I just don’t want to feel depressed and anxious anymore, and I sure
don’t want to have any more crappy boyfriends [negative goals],
but I don’t know if that is possible for me. [Defense.]
Th: I notice you underestimate yourself right now. When you
underestimate yourself, does this make you happy, or does it make
you depressed? [Identify and clarify the defense.]
Pt: Depressed.
Th: Is this habit of underestimating yourself something you would like
to overcome in therapy?
Pt: If it’s possible. [Defense: self-doubt.]
Th: I notice you doubt whether progress is possible for you. Does your
mind have a tendency to doubt you and your potential? [Point out
the defense.]
Pt: [Tears.] Yes.
Th: Do you think that habit of self-doubt might be hurting you? [Point
out the price of the defense.]
Pt: I think it hurts me a lot.
Th: As soon as you declare that you would like to feel better, it’s as if a
policeman comes into the room to doubt you. It’s as if it is against
the law to have faith in you and believe in your potential. Does that
fit? [Point out causality.]
Pt: Yes. I think I doubt myself a lot.
Th: It sounds like you doubt yourself as soon as you express your desire
for a better life here. Do you see now how that happened?
Pt: I do now.
We can work productively only if the patient wants to achieve a positive
goal. If the patient has no positive goals for the therapy, you should
probably not try to treat the problem (Grawe 2007, 41).
ESTABLISHING CONSENSUS ON THE TRIANGLE OF
CONFLICT
We explore a specific example to develop a consensus with the patient
on his feelings, anxiety, and defenses (the triangle of conflict). This
consensus on what causes the patient’s problems is essential to get a
consensus on the therapeutic task.
In the following vignette, notice how the therapist checks in constantly
to make sure the patient sees his feeling, anxiety, and defenses. That way,
the therapist and patient jointly co-create a consensus on what causes the
patient’s problems.
Th: What’s the internal emotional problem you would like me to help
you with?
Pt: My doctor said I should come to see you. [Defense: projection onto
the doctor.]
Th: That’s what he said, but in your opinion, what’s the internal
emotional problem you would like me to help you with? [Block the
projection, and then return to the question.]
Pt: You should ask my doctor. [Defense: projection.]
Th: Since he’s not here, I have to ask you. [Point out the reality.]
Pt: I don’t know.
Th: Yet you are here. And I’m sure you wouldn’t come here for no
reason at all. [Point out the contradiction between what he says (“I
have no psychological problems”) and what he does (he comes to a
psychologist’s office).]
Pt: That’s true.
Th: What’s the internal emotional problem you would like me to help
you with?
Pt: I’ve been a little down lately. [Begins to declare an internal
emotional problem.]
Th: A little down?
Pt: Yeah. Trouble sleeping, not eating much, not much desire for much
of anything.
Th: These are some symptoms you have: trouble sleeping, not eating
much, not much desire for anything. Have you always been this
way, or is this a more recent change?
Pt: No, I haven’t always been this way.
Th: When did it start? [Find out what triggered the onset of his
symptoms.]
Pt: Oh, about two years ago.
Th: What was happening around that time?
Pt: Not much that I can think of. Oh. I lost my job and was unemployed
for a while.
Th: Can you tell me more about that?
Pt: I was a vice president with XYZ Company. I’d been there for twenty
years and had done really well, but it turned out that an accountant
under me was embezzling funds. The company accused me of
embezzlement and fired me on the spot. Later, the auditors
discovered it was the accountant and not me, but by then it was too
late. I’d been fired. There was new management in the company, so
no one was going to ask me back.
Th: These symptoms started when you were fired from this job,
although you had been a vice president after twenty years of
excellent service. You were fired through no cause of your own but
because you were wrongly blamed for the crime of a subordinate.
You must have some feelings about that. [Asking about feelings will
trigger feelings, anxiety, or defenses.]
Pt: Yeah. I got over them. [Defenses: denial and detaching.]
Th: “Getting over them” tells us how you detached from your emotions.
[Identify his defense.] Would you like to take a look at these
emotions so we can see what triggered all these symptoms?
[Invitation to the task.]
Pt: I was not pleased when the boss called me in. [Defense:
minimization.]
Th: “Not pleased” tells me what you didn’t feel. What is the feeling
toward him? [Identify his defense, and then ask about the feeling.]
Pt: No feeling really. [Defense: denial.] I just thought he didn’t handle it
well. [Defense: intellectualization.]
Th: That’s what you thought, but what’s the feeling toward him if you
don’t cover it with thoughts? [Label the defense, invite him to turn
against it, and then ask for the feeling that the defense has been
hiding.]
Pt: I thought the fact that— [Defense: intellectualization.]
Th: [Interrupts the defense.] That’s your thought, but if you don’t cover
your feeling with thoughts [differentiate his defense from his
feeling], what’s the feeling toward the boss for firing you,
disbelieving you, and blaming you for someone else’s crime?
[Invite the feeling.]
Pt: Disbelieved. [Defense: the patient confuses the stimulus with his
feeling. The boss did not believe him (stimulus), and this triggered
a feeling in the patient, probably anger.]
Th: He disbelieved you. That’s what he did, but what do you feel toward
him for doing that? [Differentiate the stimulus from the feeling, and
then invite the feeling.]
Pt: I felt I was wrong because I should have known what that
accountant was doing. [Defense: he turns anger onto himself rather
than feel it toward his boss. This would cause depression.]
Th: You notice I’m asking you about the feeling toward your boss?
Pt: Yes.
Th: And do you notice how a critical part of your brain takes the feeling
toward your boss and turns it into criticism on you now? [Show
how he turns the anger on himself rather than feel it toward his
boss.]
Pt: I didn’t see that, but I can see how you see that.
Th: Do you think that turning this feeling toward your boss into
criticism of yourself might be hurting you? [Help him see how the
defense makes him depressed.]
Pt: Yes I think it is hurting me because I have been getting really
depressed, and my wife tells me I am too hard on myself. [Patient
can see causality: turning anger on himself makes him depressed.]
Th: Could we take a look at the feeling toward your boss without
turning it into criticism of yourself, so we can see what is driving
this depression? [Mobilize his will to the task.]
Pt: Sure.
Th: So what’s the feeling toward your boss? [Invite the feeling.]
Pt: Anger.
Th: Your boss blamed you for the accountant’s crime [stimulus]. You
felt angry with your boss [feeling], and that’s not a problem. The
problem is the way you handle your anger. When you get angry,
you cover it up with thoughts [defense]. Or you distance yourself
from your anger and other emotions so that you are out of touch
with what you feel. Or you deny that you are angry and get more
out of touch with what you feel and want, and that leads you to feel
unmotivated. Then you showed us how you turn anger into selfcriticism, and that makes you depressed [problems caused by his
defenses] or you turn the anger at him onto yourself, and that also
gets you depressed. Do you see what I mean? [Outline the triangle
of conflict so he can see what causes his problems.]
ESTABLISHING CONSENSUS ON THE THERAPEUTIC
TASK
Having explored the patient’s conflicts and established a consensus on
what creates the patient’s difficulties, we can get consensus on the
therapeutic task. Following are the structures for the interventions you can
use to help the patient formulate the therapeutic task:
1. “We see that when you have x feeling, you use a, b, and c defenses.”
2. “When you use a defense, do you think that might create this
presenting problem?”
3. “Our task, if you want to pursue it, is to let go of those defenses and
face the feelings.”
4. “Our goal is for you to have an adaptive capacity instead of a
symptom. For example, instead of feeling timid, you could
experience your power; instead of feeling depressed, you could feel
happy; instead of feeling anxious, you could feel confident; and
instead of feeling like a victim, you could assert yourself
effectively.”
5. “Does that sound like something you would like to do?”
Therapeutic Task: Help the patient let go of his defenses and face his
feelings. This task achieves his therapeutic goal.
Therapeutic Goal: Help the patient replace his defenses that cause
symptoms with adaptive channeling of his feelings that create
healthy functioning.
The following vignette shows how to establish a consensus on the task
during the phase of inquiry. The patient suffers from depression, anxiety,
and conflicts with colleagues.
Th: Can we look at an example of a situation where you have trouble
with conflicts?
Pt: Sure. There was a situation in which a person misperceived me in a
way I thought was unfair. [She presents the problem but in such a
vague and generalized manner we can’t explore it.]
Th: Can you be more specific? [Invite specificity.]
Pt: It was the new bookkeeper. I needed a paper from a drawer in her
office, and we have had access to that drawer for years, but when I
came in there she started yelling and accused me of violating
company policy.
Th: What was the feeling toward her when she yelled at you? [Invite the
feeling.]
Pt: I felt like a little girl. [Defense: she takes a little girl position rather
than face her feelings toward the bookkeeper.]
Th: I understand you began to take the position of a little girl, even
though you are obviously a competent adult. [Point out the
defense.] But from your perspective as a competent adult, what is
your feeling toward her?
Pt: I felt timid. [Defense.]
Th: When she started yelling at you, you took a timid, little girl position.
Do you think that little girl position helped you deal with her, or did
it get in the way? [Help her see the price of the defense.]
Pt: It definitely gets in the way. [She sees her defense is maladaptive.]
Th: If we don’t go to timidity or the little girl position [invite her to turn
against the defense], can we see what the feeling is underneath, the
feeling you have toward her?
Pt: I was angry. [Feeling.]
Th: You felt angry with her, and then covered your anger with timidity
and with a little girl façade, but what you really felt was anger.
Pt: That’s true, but I feel timid right now. [Defense.]
Th: As soon as this anger comes up between us, you are tempted to
cover your anger now with timidity [point out the defense] rather
than have us face the anger together. [Distinguish the defense from
the therapeutic task.] Do you see what I mean?
Pt: Yes.
Th: What impact will that have on our work if you cover your anger
with timidity rather than face it in therapy? [Draw her attention to
the price of the defense. Point out the difference between using a
defense and the therapeutic task: turning against defenses.]
Pt: I guess I wouldn’t get to the anger.
Th: When you hide your anger under timidity, do you think that is
helping you, or is that causing the work problems you mentioned?
[Invite her to see how the defense creates her presenting problem.
Turn her against the defense.]
Pt: It could be causing my work problems. [The patient does not see
clearly how her defenses create her problems.]
Th: When you hide your anger under this little girl façade, does this
make you feel powerful and strong, or does it make you weak and
anxious?
Pt: It definitely makes me anxious.
Th: When you hold back your anger under the timidity and take more of
this yelling without standing your ground, does that make you feel
good or depressed?
Pt: I haven’t thought about this before, but I can see how this has made
me depressed.
Th: We can see how hiding your anger under timidity and the little girl
façade has made you anxious and depressed and has prevented you
from being able to deal with work conflicts in the powerful adult
manner you would like. Our task, if you want to pursue it, is to let
go of this timidity and little girl façade here so we can face your
anger completely and get to the bottom of what has been driving
this submissive pattern of behavior. That way we can help you feel
your anger and power rather than cover your power with this façade
of timidity. We can help you assert yourself effectively so you don’t
have to feel depressed; and we can help you show your adult
capacities so you don’t have to hide in the anxious façade of the
little girl. Does that sound like something you would like to do?
[Outline the patient’s task in therapy.]
Remind the patient of her goals and her task. Each time she uses a
defense, point out her choice: she can use her defenses and continue to
suffer, or she can turn against her defenses and achieve her positive goals.
During the phase of inquiry, we establish a conscious therapeutic
alliance based on the patient’s willingness to explore the conflicts creating
his presenting problems. Moderately resistant patients collaborate easily.
Fragile patients become overwhelmed with anxiety. Highly resistant
patients use defenses instead of exploring.
We do not take an extensive history initially for several reasons. First of
all, we have no right to take the patient’s history until he says he has a
problem he wants to resolve in therapy. Second, it is not safe to take the
patient’s history until we know where his anxiety is discharged. As he
describes traumas in his past, anxiety can become discharged into
cognitive/perceptual disruption. The patient, rather than remember his
history, begins to relive it in the therapy, retraumatizing himself. Do not
take a full history until you have assessed the patient’s anxiety and helped
him regulate it. We do not take a history initially with highly resistant
patients because presenting the history in a defensive, detached manner is
not healing or integrative. Instead, we work on defenses until the history
emerges with deep feeling and insight, leading to an integrative experience.
We take a history not just to gain information but to form a healing
relationship. Getting information without regulating the fragile patient’s
anxiety would be harmful, not healing. Getting information while defenses
are high creates an avoidant, detached nontherapeutic relationship. Help the
patient’s feelings come out with regulated anxiety. Address any defenses so
the past can emerge in an emotionally integrative fashion while anxiety is
regulated.
First, get an intrapsychic focus by asking for an internal problem to
work on. Then assess each response to intervention. If the patient floods
with anxiety, regulate the anxiety and then explore feelings. If he presents
with numerous defenses, help him turn against them and then explore
feelings. Through this exploration you will learn the conflicts that cause his
problems.
As the patient reveals his feelings, anxiety, and defenses to you, he is
simultaneously revealing his history. Every time we invite him to form a
closer alliance, unconscious feelings related to past relationships emerge in
the here and now. These unconscious feelings trigger unconscious anxiety
in his body, revealing his history of affect regulation. The defenses he uses
reveal how he learned to avoid his feelings with others. These moment-tomoment fluctuations of feeling, anxiety, and defense present his relational
history, or the “present unconscious” (Fonagy et al. 2002). The procedural
memory of his relationships reveals not only his defenses but the history of
his suffering.
Once he relinquishes his defenses, his history will emerge
spontaneously, and he will experience breakthroughs to unconscious
feelings. Then he will emotionally experience the connections between his
past and present in a new way.
THE UNCONSCIOUS THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Establishing a conscious therapeutic alliance triggers feelings and
anxiety in the patient because the therapist invites the patient to reveal her
inner life. The invitation to an emotionally intimate relationship evokes two
kinds of reactions. On the one hand, the patient unconsciously resorts to
defenses based on her past suffering. “How dare you tempt me to be close
to you after what was done to me!” In spite of the patient’s resistance and
anger, the therapist gently yet firmly persists, demonstrating to the patient
that he wants to know her deeply and is willing to face her feelings.
This dedicated focus on her inner life mobilizes the patient’s longings
for love and freedom from suffering, accompanied by positive feelings
toward the therapist who persists in spite of her resistance. This inner wish
for emotional freedom, to know herself deeply and to love, and the deeply
positive feelings for the therapist together constitute signs of the
unconscious therapeutic alliance (Davanloo 1987). Why unconscious?
Sometimes patients are so resistant that we see almost no conscious
therapeutic alliance, but the bodily signs of feeling and anxiety reveal to us
that there is a part of the patient, albeit unconscious, that longs for inner
freedom. Unconscious anxiety and feeling are signals telling us that a part
of the patient longs for health and wholeness, even if the patient’s words
deny this. Through our dedication to her inner freedom, we can mobilize
her desire to relinquish her defenses and reveal who she truly is underneath.
All our interventions are designed to increase the conscious and
unconscious therapeutic alliance. Never mistake the resistance for the
patient. The resistance is merely the tragic façade with which the patient has
covered herself. As one patient said to me, “I always realized that you saw
that person wasn’t me. You saw who I could be underneath before I could
see it myself.” That person underneath is our ally.
One can think of the unconscious therapeutic alliance as the patient’s
inherent wish to become at one with the Truth of her existence. Bion refers
to our epistemophilia, our love of the truth, as a Truth instinct (Bion 1970).
He suggests that we have an inherent instinct to become transformed by
becoming at one with the emotional truth in this moment. We help the
patient face the truth so she can lead a life in the truth rather than remain
imprisoned in her false self. Through our focus on the patient’s feelings, we
form a partnership with her unconscious longing for union with the truth. In
this sense, the unconscious therapeutic alliance is relational. In our work,
both the therapist and the patient long to become at one with the emotional
truth in this moment. In fact, it is the therapist’s courage to face and
experience the truth of this moment that gives the patient the courage to do
the same. And sometimes, it is the patient’s courage that gives us the faith
to go forward.
SUMMARY
During the phase of inquiry, the patient and therapist co-create a
relationship for change. To develop a therapeutic alliance, the therapist and
patient must explore and discover the following ingredients in this order:
1. An internal emotional problem he has (the intrapsychic focus)
2. His will to seek therapy for this problem
3. A specific example of the problem
4. A positive goal the therapy is designed to achieve
Through exploring the problem, the therapist and patient develop a
consensus on
1. The conflicts creating the patient’s presenting problems
2. The therapeutic task
We co-create this relationship for change step by step. Anytime you run
into problems, refer to this list of ingredients to find out which element of
the therapeutic alliance is missing. Often, the two missing ingredients are a
presenting problem and a specific example. Figures 6.2 and 6.3 show the
decision trees for those two steps in developing an alliance.
Figure 6.2 Inquiry: Declaring an internal emotional problem
Figure 6.3 Inquiry: Getting a specific example of the problem
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Coughlin Della Selva, P. (1996). The trial therapy. In Intensive short-term
dynamic psychotherapy: Theory and technique. (pp. 26–57). New York:
Wiley.
Lebeaux, D. (2000). The role of the conscious therapeutic alliance in
Davanloo’s intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy. International
Journal of Intensive Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy, 14(1), 39–48.
RECOMMENDED MATERIALS
If you want to view some video presentatons by Patricia Coughlin on
forming a therapeutic alliance, visit the URLs below.
Intensive short-term dynamic psychotheapy part 4 (May 5, 2012).
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eVOgXhq49ek.
Intensive short-term dynamic psychotheapy part 5 (June 27, 2012).
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DDKEGwXiNsY.
PART TWO
Building Capacity in Fragile Patients
O
CHAPTER SEVEN
Treating Fragility, Depression, and Somatization
ne day a traumatized patient described how her mother tried to
smother her to death. Just before she flooded with anxiety, I
interrupted and asked her to slow down. When she asked why, I
replied that a garden needs only a little rain to grow well. If there is too
much rain, the garden’s soil can be washed away. She said, “Well, in my
previous therapy I think I got eroded.”
The spectrum of fragility refers to patients who suffer from anxiety
discharged into cognitive/perceptual disruption, low self-observing
capacity, and regressive defenses (H. Davanloo, supervision 2002–2004).
These patients can tolerate only a little feeling before they flood with
anxiety, which shifts out of the striated muscles.
Patients with mild fragility use repressive defenses during the phase of
inquiry. Their anxiety rises until it shifts out of the striated muscles into
cognitive/perceptual disruption. They blank out, they experience blurry
vision and ringing in the ears, but they do not necessarily project.
Moderately fragile patients shift to cognitive/perceptual disruption and
begin to use regressive defenses such as weepiness, self-attack, and
somatization.
Severely fragile patients experience cognitive/perceptual disruption and
use regressive defenses even before the session begins. Their self-observing
capacity is very low. Most important, they equate others with their
projections. The loss of reality testing means the therapist must restructure
projections to form a therapeutic alliance.
Fragile patients with depression begin to use regressive defenses such as
weepiness, self-attack, and projection of the superego before they shift into
cognitive/perceptual disruption. Fragile patients with somatic symptoms
often use the defense of somatization. Impulsive patients use projection,
verbal discharge, and acting out to get rid of their internal feelings. Severely
fragile patients resort to projection, splitting, and projective identification.
Before pursuing a breakthrough to unconscious feelings with fragile
patients, the therapist must restructure the pathway of unconscious anxiety
discharge, the regressive defenses, and self-observing capacity (Gottwik et
al. 1998a, 1998b, 1998c). First, restructure the patient’s pathway of anxiety
discharge so it goes in the striated muscles at high levels of feeling.
Otherwise, the patient will be overwhelmed with physical symptoms, and
her brain will not function properly. Then restructure her regressive
defenses, which cause panic states, depression, somatization, acting out, and
a loss of reality testing. While restructuring anxiety and defenses, build the
patient’s self-observing capacity. Otherwise, no intrapsychic focus will be
possible.
ASSESSMENT OF FRAGILITY: ANXIETY
The symptoms of cognitive/perceptual disruption are blurry vision,
tunnel vision, ringing in the ears, falling asleep, thought blocking, genuine
inability to think, dissociation, projective identification, passing out, and
equating the therapist with a projection. For instance, when inviting feeling,
“What is the feeling toward your wife?” the following answers reveal
fragility.
Blank stare. [Cognitive/perceptual disruption.]
“What did you say?” [Cognitive/perceptual disruption.]
“I think you are angry at me.” [Projection: the patient looks frightened,
as if he believes you are the same as his projection.]
A man argues with his wife and stomps out of the house but cannot
remember what he said to her. [Possible cognitive/perceptual
disruption.]
A woman speaks about her sadistic mother, suddenly feels murderous
rage, and jumps out of her chair. [Cognitive/perceptual disruption,
loss of orientation to time and place.]
As a result of cognitive/perceptual disruption, severely fragile patients
often cannot give a clear account of recent events, or they present as
hypotonic, speaking lifelessly.
Fragile patients often use impulsive masturbation, compulsive sex, or
drugs to anesthetize rather than regulate their anxiety. Having outlined the
anxiety symptoms, let us look at the fragile patient’s self-observing capacity
and regressive defenses, and how to treat them.
Principle: Regulate anxiety as soon as it goes into the smooth muscles or
cognitive/perceptual disruption. Do not resume exploration of
the feeling until anxiety goes in the striated muscles. (See
chapter 2.)
ASSESSMENT OF FRAGILITY: LOW SELF-OBSERVING
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
Even before arriving at the first session, severely fragile patients may
suffer from cognitive/perceptual disruption. They project onto and fear the
therapist, whom they equate with their projection. They may get lost on
their way to the session or call several times to confirm the appointment
hour because anxiety impairs their memory.
The severely fragile patient ignores his anxiety as soon as he observes
it. Therefore, he cannot regulate it. Instead, he resorts to regressive defenses
such as talking over the therapist, pressured speech, or projection to ignore
his anxiety.
He ignores his anxiety, the stimulus, and his feelings. As a result, he
cannot see the triangle of conflict causing his difficulties. Projection
prevents him from seeing causality correctly. He thinks other people, not his
feelings, make him anxious.
We must help the fragile patient: (1) observe and pay attention to his
feeling, anxiety, and defense in the moment; (2) distinguish the feeling from
anxiety and defense; (3) see causality: a stimulus triggers feelings that
evoke anxiety that trigger defenses that cause the presenting problems; (4)
tolerate the feeling while anxiety is discharged in the striated muscles; (5)
see and let go of regressive defenses; (6) differentiate himself from his
defenses; and (7) differentiate the therapist from projections.
Principle: Strengthen the fragile patient’s observing capacities first, so
he can regulate his anxiety and let go of his defenses. Do not
encourage any pathological regression, transference
neurosis, or psychosis.
ASSESSMENT OF FRAGILITY: REGRESSIVE DEFENSES
Severely fragile patients habitually use splitting, which is the basis of
other defenses they use.
Projection: I split off a feeling or desire as “not me” and project it onto
you.
Projective identification: I split off a feeling or desire of mine and make
you feel it instead (Grotstein 1985; T. Ogden 1982).
Dissociation: I split off a feeling or desire as “not me” and no longer
experience it as part of me.
The feelings of severely fragile patients are not repressed out of
awareness by defenses, but separated in consciousness by splitting. For
instance, a moderately resistant patient may intellectualize and be unaware
of anger toward his boss. In contrast, a fragile patient splits anger off from
himself. “I never feel anger.” Then he projects: “My boss is angry at me.”
Or he may split off love, so he feels only rage toward a formerly loved one.
Then the split-off rage can rise rapidly without other mixed feelings (Reller
2005, quoted by Troendle 2005). A woman claims she feels only rage
toward her dead husband but no grief, love, or guilt. She splits off her rage
from the complex mixed feelings typical of any human relationship.
Exploring her split-off rage is destructive, encouraging splitting and
devaluation.
Principle: Restructure regressive defenses as soon as they occur. Restore
reality testing by restructuring projection. Eliminate physical
symptoms by restructuring somatization. Increase feeling
tolerance by restructuring discharge and acting out. Then
explore the feeling again. (See chapter 9.)
Symptoms Created by Regressive Defenses in Fragile Patients
Chronic projection results in diffuse, free-floating anxiety that covers
split-apart or incompatible feelings. For instance, a woman struggling with
rage toward a former guru covered it up with idealized love for him.
Momentarily aware of her criticism, she blanked out, her anxiety covering
her rage. She idealized her guru again but claimed I was critical of him. By
projecting her anger onto me, she did not have to experience the conflict
between her anger and love for the guru.
Chronic projection can also create social phobias. A patient judges
herself for a moment and then imagines others judge her. Now afraid of
people whom she believes are judging her, she does not see that she
projects. Such patients can lose their reality testing for several hours or
days. They do not suffer from social anxiety: fear of other people. They
suffer from and fear the projections they place on others. Constant
projection makes them constantly anxious. Their anxiety is not repressed by
defenses or character traits. It is chronically perpetuated by projection,
which must be restructured.
Splitting keeps “good” and “bad” feelings separate. To avoid complex
emotions, the patient relies on splitting, viewing people as all good or all
bad. By doing so, his cognitive functioning and reality testing become
impaired, leaving him prone to further panic reactions. As a result, the
patient has a partial, shifting, and distorted view of himself and others. He
cannot differentiate fantasy from reality.
A patient, angry with the therapist for having been on vacation, splits
off the anger as “not me.” The second step is projection, attributing her
anger to someone else. If she projects her anger onto the therapist, she
becomes afraid of him. If she judges herself, she projects, accuses the
therapist of judging her, and fears him as if he were a judge. If she splits off
her desire to look at her feelings, she projects, accuses him of wanting to
look at her feelings, then either fears or defies “his” desire. “What do you
want from me?” The patient’s defiance serves as an imaginary boundary
between herself and her denied desire, now projected onto the therapist.
Through projection, she can deny the existence of feelings, judgments, and
desires within herself.
Splitting can also create multiple, bizarre, chronic bodily symptoms in
somatizing patients. One patient had somatic symptoms in his wrist with no
apparent medical cause for many years. Doctors had done so many
surgeries that his wrist no longer functioned. He entered the office with a
leg in a splint and his arm in a sling due to unspecified pain symptoms,
which defied the diagnostic skills of his physicians. Following a
breakthrough to his feelings, the patient’s symptoms disappeared.
Fragile patients often suffer from dissociative reactions, fugues, and
amnesia, leading to conditions such as chronic depersonalization. A woman
sought treatment for ADHD. Instead of ADHD, we discovered that frequent
experiences of dissociation interfered with her memory, concentration, and
thinking. As a result, her academic performance plummeted until she began
therapy. Severe suicidality often involves splitting. A woman telephoned
me to say she had hundreds of pills in her apartment and intended to kill
herself. After I had her hospitalized, she threatened to sue me for having
called the police. Her call revealed that she wanted to live. But once I acted
on her healthy wish, she could split off and project her wish onto me. Then
she raged at me (her projected wish to live) for having saved her life.
Perverse behavior and fantasies also involve regressive defenses. A patient
claimed his photographs of nude children were not illegal (omnipotent
denial). He said he was comfortable with child pornography but was
convinced I judged him for it (projection of the superego). Rather than
tolerate his own judgment, he projected it onto me.
Impulsivity in fragile patients often results from acting out of rage, split
apart from complex feelings. For instance, a man sent a hate-filled letter to
his son and proudly read it to me. Until we discussed his letter and feelings
in detail, he felt only split-off rage, but no guilt or grief about his acting out.
Nor did he see how the acting out punished him by killing off the love his
son could have felt for him.
THE GRADED FORMAT: THE TREATMENT FOR THE
SPECTRUM OF FRAGILITY
We use the graded format for patients who suffer from regressive
defenses, low self-observing capacity, and anxiety discharged into the
smooth muscles and cognitive/perceptual disruption (H. Davanloo,
supervision 2002–2004; Whittemore 1996). The following conditions
require the graded approach:
Depression with episodes of major clinical depression
Chronic depression
Depressed patients with high resistance and functional disturbances,
such as migraine headaches, stomachaches, and diarrhea
Panic disorder
Severe psychosomatic disorders
Fragile character structure
Problems of impulse control
Highly syntonic character pathology
Use the graded format when you see the following responses or
symptoms:
Anxiety discharged into cognitive/perceptual disruption or the
smooth muscles
Regressive defenses (e.g., self-attack, weepiness, conversion, ego
syntonic self-hatred, somatization, projection, and suicidal ideation)
Low self-observing capacity
When patients suffer from the symptoms listed above, the therapist
needs to shift from a purely exploratory approach to one that builds
structure within the patient. That is, the therapist must change the pathway
of anxiety discharge in the patient’s body, build the patient’s capacity to
bear feelings internally without projecting them onto others, and build the
patient’s capacity to observe his feelings, anxiety, and defenses internally.
To do this, the therapist uses the graded format, a process whereby the
therapist gradually invites feeling until the patient’s problems with anxiety,
regressive defenses, or self-observing capacity arise. The therapist builds
the patient’s capacity at that moment and then gradually invites feeling
again. Step by step the therapist builds the patient’s capacities. The
following steps outline the sequence of interventions for the graded format:
1. Invite feeling until the patient goes over the threshold for anxiety
tolerance or uses a regressive defense.
2. Stop inviting feeling and offer a cognitive summary of what just
happened so the patient can see the sequence of feeling, anxiety, and
symptom or defense.
3. When anxiety returns to the striated muscles, and the patient’s
thinking clears up, invite feeling again in a different relationship.
Keep repeating that cycle, building the patient’s capacity to bear the
feeling at higher levels while anxiety remains in the striated muscles. Even
low-level breakthroughs of feeling increase the fragile patient’s capacity.
The more feeling the patient can bear while anxiety goes into the striated
muscles, the fewer symptoms she will have. Eventually, she will be able to
bear her feelings while anxiety goes into the striated muscles and without
using regressive defenses.
The Threshold of Anxiety Tolerance
When anxiety moves into smooth muscles or cognitive/perceptual
disruption, regulate anxiety until it returns to the striated muscles. However,
the anxiety of fragile patients decreases slowly because the body must
metabolize the released neurohormones. Be patient until anxiety returns to
the striated muscles and cognitive functioning improves.
Patients with mild fragility can pay attention to their anxiety quickly
with the therapist’s help. Moderately fragile patients need help to see and let
go of defenses of ignoring, neglecting, and denying anxiety so they can pay
attention to and regulate it. (See chapters 2 and 9.) Restructure the
projections of severely fragile patients first, before regulating their anxiety.
(See chapters 2 and 9.)
Restructuring Anxiety
As soon as anxiety moves out of the striated muscles, invite the patient
to pay attention to her anxiety. Then help him see causality: the feeling
triggers anxiety symptoms. In this excerpt, notice how the therapist
regulates the patient’s anxiety, helps him see causality, and then shifts to a
different example.
Th: What is the feeling toward your wife for walking out on you?
Pt: I feel like she let me down. [Defense: confuses the stimulus (what
she did) with his feeling toward her.]
Th: Yes, she did. What is the feeling toward her for doing that?
Pt: Irritated. [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: “Irritated” is a bit vague. Could we get a clearer picture of this
feeling toward her?
Pt: [Patient’s face goes blank and his muscles go slack.] What did you
say?
Th: How is your thinking right now?
Pt: My mind kind of blanked out.
Th: That’s a sign of anxiety. Are you aware of feeling anxious right
now?
Pt: Yes.
Th: As soon as you mentioned feeling irritated at your wife, you got
anxious, and then your mind blanked out. Do you see how that
sequence just happened?
Pt: I do now.
Th: It sounds like we should help you with this irritation so you could
just feel it and channel it in a healthy manner instead of having your
mind conk out on you when you need it the most. [Point out the
therapeutic task.]
Pt: That’s what happens. My mind conks out.
Th: Wouldn’t it be nice to be able to feel your irritation without your
mind giving out on you?
Pt: [Sighs.] Yes, it would.
Th: Can we take a look at another situation where this irritation comes
up? [Move to another example to explore his feelings.]
Restructuring: The Cognitive Recapitulation
Once the patient’s anxiety has crossed the threshold of anxiety
tolerance, the therapist will cognitively summarize the process to help the
patient regulate her anxiety. In this cognitive recapitulation, the therapist
will go through the following steps to regulate the patient’s anxiety before
exploring feeling again in a different example of the problem.
Step One: Point out the symptom. [“Do you notice how your mind
blanked out?”]
Step Two: Identify that symptom as a sign of anxiety. [“That’s a sign of
anxiety.”]
Step Three: Point out the triangle of conflict and causality. [“You felt
this irritation toward your wife, you got anxious, and then your
mind blanked out. Do you see that?”]
Step Four: Check to see if the symptoms have stopped. If not, repeat
steps one through three until the symptoms disappear. [“How is
your thinking now?”]
Step Five: Explore the feeling in an example with a different person.
[“Would you like to take a look at another example in which this
anger comes up for you so we can help your mind no longer conk
out on you?”]
Whenever the patient experiences cognitive/perceptual disruption,
cognitively summarize what has just happened until the patient’s anxiety
returns to the striated muscles. Encourage intellectualization, a more mature
defense, when the patient’s anxiety becomes too high. Since the patient’s
anxiety went over the threshold of anxiety tolerance, we assume the patient
has gone as far as she can in this example of her problem. Thus, we offer
the defense of displacement by encouraging her to explore her feelings in a
different relationship so we can continue to build her capacity.
Restructuring Regressive Defenses
Moderately and highly resistant patients use repressive defenses to keep
feelings out of their awareness. Fragile patients use regressive defenses,
which lead to a regression in reality testing and worsened physical
symptoms. Address regressive defenses immediately.
Once anxiety shifts into the smooth muscles, repressive defenses fail to
keep anxiety from rising so cognitive/perceptual disruption results.
Moderately fragile patients shift to regressive defenses such as weepiness.
If anxiety rises even more, regressive defenses such as splitting and
projection emerge. Severely fragile patients use regressive defenses such as
splitting and projecting at the beginning of the session. They do not see the
feeling triggering their anxiety because they either project it onto others or
anxiety clouds their awareness. You can ask the obsessive patient to put
anxiety to the side and examine his feelings, but not the fragile patient. He
cannot differentiate himself from the anxiety that floods him. Address ego
deficits and regressive defenses first to form a therapeutic alliance.
Often, the first regressive defense we must address is projection.
Everyone uses projection at one time or another (Willick 1985). However,
fragile patients lose the ability to differentiate reality from fantasy. When
they project their internal judgments, they imagine the therapist is judging
them. In response, they fear or become angry with this supposed judge.
Help the patient see the difference between the therapist and the projection.
Otherwise, the loss of reality testing will create a misalliance.
Gently invite the fragile patient to face his feelings until regressive
defenses (projection, primitive idealization, splitting, etc.) emerge. Then
stop inviting the feeling. Restructure regressive defenses. First, help him
observe and pay attention to his defenses. Then help him see causality: his
defenses create his presenting problems. Only when he sees how his
defenses hurt him will he understand the therapeutic task: letting go of his
defenses. (See chapter 9.)
Once a fragile patient sees how he has hurt himself, he will feel anxiety,
grief, and guilt. If these feelings trigger cognitive/perceptual disruption, he
may use splitting and projection to get rid of those feelings. To avoid his
internal judgment, he may project this internal judge: “I feel you are
criticizing me.” Now he fears or is angry toward the supposedly “critical”
therapist. He is in conflict between his wish to get well and his defenses,
which sabotage his wish. To avoid this conflict within himself, he imagines
the conflict is outside himself, that is, between him and the therapist. To
address his defense, remind him of a contradiction within himself, which he
avoids through splitting.
In the following example, an actively alcoholic man has just told me
that he does his best professional work after having drunk one and a half
bottles of wine. Notice how I mirror his irrationality so he can see it more
readily and reflect on it.
Th: You say this drinking is a problem, but at the same time you think
you do your best work when you have a bottle and half of wine in
you. [Mirror the contradiction he avoids through splitting.]
Pt: I know you don’t think that’s a good idea. [I never said that. He
projects his healthy awareness onto me.]
Th: But in the end only you can know what is good for you, and if
drinking a bottle and a half of wine allows you to do your best
work, who am I to get in the way? If it works for you, why do
anything different? [Mirror his denial and block the projection of
his awareness.]
Pt: I’m not sure it is working. [Rise in awareness.]
Responses to Integrating Splitting and Projections
When the patient takes back what he projected onto others, he will
experience a rise of anxiety. He may sigh (anxiety returns to the striated
muscles) and reflect on how he has projected. If he experiences transient
cognitive/perceptual disruption, point out causality. Cognitively summarize
what has just happened until his anxiety returns to the striated muscles. This
builds his capacity to bear conflictual feelings without using splitting or
projection.
Pt: I feel dizzy.
Th: As soon as you feel your anger, you get anxious, and then you get
dizzy. You said he was angry with you, but now we see you are
angry with him, and your anger makes you anxious, then you get
dizzy. Do you see that? [Cognitive recapitulation.]
Pt: I didn’t, but I do now.
In response to this work, some patients become more disorganized,
project more, and develop a psychotic transference (Kernberg 1975).
Unable to tolerate becoming aware of their splitting and projection, they
suffer from a psychotic level of character structure. They are candidates for
supportive but not exploratory therapy (Kernberg 1975).
Implications for Technique
Since fragile patients have such a low level of anxiety regulation and
affect tolerance, we must tailor our techniques to their capacity. In contrast
to the ways we can work with low, moderately, and highly resistant patients,
fragile patients require a careful stepwise mobilization of their capacities as
outlined in the following recommendations.
Do Not Challenge Defenses in Fragile Patients
Premature confrontation triggers a rapid rise of feeling and anxiety,
causing cognitive/perceptual disruption, projection, and a misalliance.
Instead, rely on inviting the feeling, defense identification, and defense
clarification to help the fragile patient let go of his defenses. Confrontation
is not usually necessary. He resists because his anxiety is too high or he
equates his projections (of anger, will, or superego) with reality. Premature
confrontation confirms his projections.
Differentiate Unconscious Feelings from Conscious Defensive Affects
Unconscious feelings emerge in the highly resistant patient when you
invite the feeling and point out defenses. Eventually, he feels angry with
you, even though he does not understand why. This anger, transferred to
you, belongs to an earlier figure in the patient’s life.
In contrast, the fragile patient’s feelings trigger cognitive/perceptual
disruption. Unable to tolerate the anger rising within himself, he projects his
internal judgment onto the therapist. Now the patient can be angry with the
supposedly judgmental therapist. This anger is not an unconscious feeling
toward the therapist. It is a conscious feeling in reaction to an unconscious
defense, his projection of a judge.
His conscious anger is a defensive affect, a feeling that results from, or
functions as, a defense. We do not explore defensive affects, for that would
only strengthen the patient’s projection. Instead, we deactivate the
projection, which generates the defensive affect. (See chapter 10.)
Do Not Explore Feelings Resulting from the Defense of Projection
Fragile patients can tolerate only a small amount of feelings before their
anxiety goes into cognitive/perceptual disruption. Then they resort to
projection. They may project their will to explore onto the therapist and
become defiant, as if the therapist is persecuting them. Or they may project
their anger, imagining the therapist is angry with them. In each case, the
patient is not angry with you, but at a projection, and cannot distinguish you
from it. (See chapter 9.)
Therefore, restructure the fragile patient’s projection first so he can
experience that aspect of himself without projecting it onto you. Then you
can safely explore his feelings toward you.
Th: What are you afraid I will think?
Pt: Oh, I know you aren’t angry with me.
Th: Sure. In your head and in my head we both know that, but in your
gut, your feelings, something else is going on. Inside, what are you
afraid I will think?
Reinforce the patient’s reality orientation first, and then label the
projection. Distinguish reality from fantasy. Assess his anxiety when you
address his splitting and projection.
Pt: I’m a little dizzy right now.
Th: You know I’m not angry with you. At the same time, you have this
other reaction. Notice how you get dizzy when we see these two
reactions inside you?
Pt: Yeah.
Th: You see I’m not angry, and yet your gut tells you something
different. Just noticing that contradiction, you got a little anxious
and dizzy. How is your head now?
Pt: It’s fine now. I know you’re not angry, but it’s like my gut was
saying you want to attack me.
Remind the patient of the split-apart experiences within himself that
triggered his anxiety. In response to the cognitive summary, he calms down,
and his reality testing improves.
Differentiate Anxiety Caused by Feelings from Projective Anxiety
Caused by Projection
When the patient projects his will to explore on you, he will fear you as
a persecuting therapist. His projections create projective anxiety. Clarify
projections until the projective anxiety drops. Then assess the remaining
anxiety triggered by feeling. (See chapter 2.)
Invite Feeling Gradually to Build Capacity
Carefully dose any questions that evoke feeling. Too rapid a rise of
feeling can trigger projections and overwhelming anxiety. Inviting feeling
with the fragile patient may consist merely of questions to get a clear
picture of the conflict.
Build Observing and Attentive Capacities
Experiencing feelings while flooded with anxiety does not heal the
patient. As soon as these patients experience a feeling, encourage them to
pause, observe, and then pay attention to the feeling. Once they can do so
without cognitive/perceptual disruption, encourage them to feel the feeling
more deeply.
Managing Regressive Transferences
In a neurotic transference, the patient can differentiate you from the
projection. In a regressive transference, the fragile patient cannot. Help the
patient differentiate you from his projection. Then regulate his anxiety and
build his self-observing capacity so he can bear his feelings and inner
judgment without projecting these onto others. Do not allow regressive
transferences to become entrenched. As long as he is afraid of a projection
he places on you, he will have a fearful misalliance with a projection, not a
therapeutic alliance with you.
To deactivate a projection, invite the patient to talk about what he is
afraid of or what he believes you think or want. Be patient and deliberate so
he can see his projection. Always show him causality: “This relationship
triggers feelings that make you anxious. You deal with your feelings and
anxiety by putting this part of yourself onto me.” These interventions
reestablish a therapeutic alliance and prevent regression. (See “When
Anxiety Regulation Does Not Work” in chapter 2 and the section on
“Projection” in chapter 9.)
The Emergence of Complex Feelings
An emotionally close therapeutic alliance triggers powerful unconscious
feelings toward the therapist based on the patient’s past experience. These
feelings trigger overwhelming anxiety. In response, the fragile patient can
either become overwhelmed with anxiety that covers the mixed feelings or
split off some part of her internal experience and deny its existence or
project it onto others. Once she denies or projects a part of herself onto
someone else, she no longer feels internal conflict. Thus, we can see a
layering of conflicts in the fragile patient, as illustrated in table 7.1.
Table 7.1. The sequence of causality and layers of experience in the
fragile patient
Surface
to
depth
Expression of the
conflict
Experience
Layer
four
Projective anxiety
triggers feedback loop.
“As a result, I am now flooded with
projective anxiety.”
Layer
three
Regressive
transference creates
projective anxiety.
“I am afraid of you and what you might
do to me [regressive transference].”
Layer
two
Defenses of splitting
and projection create
the regressive
transference.
“I am not angry at you [denial and
splitting], you are angry at me
[projection].”
Layer
one
Complex feelings from
the past trigger anxiety
and regressive
defenses.
“I feel anger toward you related to the
relationship with my father. This triggers
anxiety in me, so I use a regressive
defense.”
Maintaining a Therapeutic Focus with the Fragile Patient
Keep a steady focus on (1) the patient’s problem, then (2) his will to
explore it, then (3) a specific example of the problem, and then (4) his
feeling in that situation. Ask about feelings when he avoids them. Always
focus on his experience of the feeling, anxiety, or defense active in this
moment. The following are good examples of maintaining a therapeutic
focus:
“What is the problem with which you would like me to help you?”
“How is that a problem for you?”
“Is it your will to look at this here with me?”
“Can we take a look at a specific example where this problem occurs?”
“What is the feeling toward him for doing that?”
“How do you feel here with me?”
“How do you experience this feeling right now, physically in your
body?
“What is the feeling you have now as you remember that incident?”
The following are poor examples of maintaining a therapeutic focus:
“What is that like?” [Too vague and invites thinking rather than
feelings.]
“What are your feelings about that?” [Too vague. Better: “What is the
feeling toward him for doing that?”]
“How did you feel about that?” [Too vague.]
“What were your thoughts about that?” [Invites thoughts rather than
feelings.]
“Why did you feel that?” [Invites the patient to speculate about rather
than experience his feelings.]
“Why do you think he did that?” [Invites the patient to speculate about
others, that is, to project. If we strengthen the defense of projection,
we make the patient worse.]
“Why did you turn the criticism back onto yourself ?” [Invites the
patient to speculate about his defense rather than face the feeling
that triggers it. The depressed patient will feel criticized and flatten
out.]
“Was there some feeling about that?” [We always feel. Better: “What is
the feeling toward him for doing that?”]
“What were the feelings you had when he hit you?” [The patient always
has a feeling, anxiety, and sometimes, a defensive affect. Responses
such as “I felt anxious” or “I felt sad” would be accurate but
would get you no closer to the reactive anger. That is why the
question must focus on the feeling the patient avoids: “What is the
feeling toward him for doing that?”]
Maintain a Focus on the Patient’s Will
If the patient is passive or is projecting his will to do therapy upon the
therapist, deactivate the projection of will by asking the following
questions:
“Is that something you want to look into?”
“Is that a problem with which you want my help?”
“Is that your wish?”
“Is that something you want to examine?”
“Did you come of your free will?”
“Were you brought here against your will?”
“Is this your idea?”
“Would you like to get to the bottom of this problem?”
“Would you like to see the feeling underneath this anxiety?”
“Would you like to find out who you really are underneath this selfattack?”
“Would you like to overcome this problem?”
“Do you want to reveal yourself so you have better information about
yourself to help you make better decisions on your behalf ?”
Some patients reveal their projection of will by taking a passive stance.
Rather than support the patient’s passivity by being active, help the patient
become active.
“What do you make of it?”
“What do you think we ought to do?”
“Let’s see what we will do.”
“How do you suggest we proceed?”
“We could face this problem or avoid it. Which way do you think would
be most helpful to you?”
The fragile patient’s defenses create chaotic, wandering, unfocused
sessions that yield little benefit. Patients may relate to you in a
disorganized, inattentive, dismissive, and noncollaborative manner. Why?
They are unaware of the therapeutic task: to pay continuous, kind, and
loving attention to the bodily experience of their feelings and anxiety, and
shifts in the degree of our collaboration (defenses). When you inform the
fragile patient of this task, find out if he understands and is willing to do it.
Knowing what to do in therapy orients the patient, reducing his anxiety.
The following statement is longer than what I usually offer, so you can
break it up into parts. But these are all elements of the therapeutic task the
patient should know. If the patient is not engaging in the therapeutic task,
ask yourself, “Did I tell him what the therapeutic task is?”
Th: You have let me know what you want me to help you with. To do
that, we need to pay careful and kind attention to what you are
feeling in your body, notice where you feel anxiety in your body,
and note any shifts in your feelings and anxiety. We need to become
aware of these internal shifts so we can understand what is creating
the problems you have. We also need to pay close attention to our
collaboration. Sometimes your attention goes out of the room or to
another subject. When that happens, both of us need to come back
to our focus, and see what derailed you. Whatever distracts you
from your goals in here will prevent you from achieving them. We
need to pay attention to these shifts so we can achieve your goals.
Does that make sense to you?
If the patient hesitates, he may be projecting his will to do therapy onto
the therapist. In response, mobilize his will to engage in the therapeutic
task.
“Are you willing to pay attention to your feelings, anxiety, and these
shifts so we can find out what’s going on?”
“Do you want to know what is driving your problems so you could be
more in charge of your life?”
“Is this a problem you want to explore so you can get free of it?”
Once the patient has agreed on his goals for therapy, we can help him
see when his defenses sabotage his goals.
Th: I notice you are starting to describe your ex-wife’s difficulties again.
If we talk about her problems instead of yours, will we be helping
her or helping you?
Pt: Her.
Th: Could this be an example of how you put her needs before your
own?
Pt: Yeah, I guess so. I hadn’t thought about it that way.
Th: If we talked about her instead of you, who would get the most
attention here, her or you?
Pt: Her.
Th: Does that sound fair to you?
Pt: No, it doesn’t.
Th: Shall we focus on her goals or yours right now?
Pt: Mine.
STRUCTURE OF THE SESSION: INVITING FEELINGS IN
THE GRADED FORMAT
For severely fragile patients, asking about the feeling toward someone
can activate too much anxiety too quickly. Rather than ask, “What is the
feeling toward him?” you may use a gradual approach. Start with the past
tense. “What did you think?” [This helps the severely fragile patient become
aware of her reaction as a preliminary step toward awareness of feeling. Do
not do this with higher capacity patients since it encourages them to
intellectualize.] “What was your reaction to him?” “How did you feel
toward him?” Then shift to the present tense. “How do you feel toward him
now?” A sequence of interventions like this allows you to build the dosage
of feeling the patient faces so her affect tolerance can increase.
Build the patient’s capacity by using a graded invitation to feeling.
1. Invitation to be aware of the stimulus to feeling: Before inviting
feeling, you can ask the patient about the stimulus to feeling. Asking
about the stimulus builds the patient’s capacity to bear feeling before
labeling it.
• “Something I said caused a response. What did I say?”
• “I said something about you and your mother. What did I say just
now that is triggering you?”
• “You’re right. I said that. What’s that like to notice that and let it
sit here between us?” [Build her capacity to tolerate awareness of
the stimulus to the feeling.]
2. Invitation to be aware of her reaction: Asking about the patient’s
reaction allows her to become aware of her feeling before labeling
it. This also builds her capacity to tolerate feeling.
• “It sounds like you had a reaction to what I said. Do you notice
that?”
• “You are noticing this reaction. Let yourself notice this reaction to
what I said. How do you notice this reaction? What is it like to let
yourself notice that reaction and sense it?”
• “It sounds like you had a thought about what I said. What is your
thought about what I said?”
• “What is your reaction to what I said?”
3. Invitation to link her reaction to feeling: After having explored the
stimulus and the reaction (an intellectualized way of talking about
the feeling), we have built the severely fragile patient’s capacity
enough that we can ask more directly about feelings.
• “It sounds like there is a feeling that goes with this reaction. What
is that feeling?”
• “What do you notice feeling in reaction to what I said?”
• “What do you notice feeling in reaction to my saying you are
close to your mother?”
• “What is the feeling toward me?”
• “What do you feel toward me?”
This sequence of interventions allows feeling to rise gradually, building
the patient’s capacity without running the risk of going over the threshold of
anxiety tolerance too rapidly. Use this extremely graded approach only with
severely fragile patients. Support the severely fragile patient when feelings
overwhelm the capacity for self-observation:
“Let’s step back and notice this feeling and observe it.”
“What’s it like to see that feeling and notice it?”
“Let’s pause. When you step back to notice this feeling, what are the
sensations in your body that you are aware of ?”
“If you don’t dive into the feeling, what happens as you just let your
toe be in the water for a minute?”
Help her bear as much feeling as she can while her anxiety remains in
the striated muscles and her thinking capacities are intact. Continue
building her capacity step by step until she can bear the full force of her
feelings.
When to Decrease the Invitation to Explore Feelings
We explore feelings to help build the patient’s capacity for affect
tolerance and to restructure her pathway of unconscious anxiety discharge,
regressive defenses, and self-observing capacity. However, it is also
important to know when to shift from exploring feelings to restructuring.
Begin restructuring as soon as you see the following responses:
1. Unconscious signaling of anxiety in striated muscles stops. The
patient experiences difficulty breathing because the intercostal
muscles are not operating automatically. The patient becomes
suddenly limp and slumps in the chair, feeling weak. Isolation of
affect disappears;
2. Anxiety shifts into smooth muscles producing physical pain;
3. Anxiety shifts into cognitive/perceptual disruption: the patient
becomes confused or angry with you, equating you with a
projection;
4. Defenses become regressive: splitting, projection, dissociation, and
acting out occur in session.
These signs indicate that the patient has gone over the threshold of
anxiety tolerance. If you continue to invite feeling, the patient will react
with uncontrolled anxiety, rage, depression, somatization, or other forms of
severe regression.
Instead of inviting feeling, regulate the patient’s anxiety.
1. Stop inviting feeling.
2. Offer a cognitive summary of what just happened.
3. Invite the patient to describe the bodily symptoms of anxiety;
ground her in her body.
4. Help the patient intellectualize about other topics.
5. If these anxiety-regulation techniques do not work, address ego
deficits and defenses, which perpetuate anxiety (see chapter 2).
6. Invite the patient to explore feelings in another corner of the triangle
of person.
As a reminder, the triangle of conflict refers to the feeling, the anxiety it
triggers, and the defense used to avoid the feeling. The triangle of person
refers to three kinds of relationships where conflict can occur: a relationship
in the past, the present, or with the therapist. If the patient explored a
relationship with his boss and his anxiety became too high, regulate the
anxiety and help him see the triangle of conflict. Then invite the patient to
explore feelings again, not with the boss, but in a relationship in the past or
with the therapist. Extended invitation to feeling in the transference,
confronting defenses, and breakthroughs to unconscious feelings are
possible only when the patient’s anxiety goes into the striated muscles.
When to Resume Invitation to Feeling
Invite feeling when anxiety goes into the striated muscles or the patient
uses isolation of affect. When the patient suggests we explore an issue or
asks, “Why does that happen?” he is intellectualizing and ready to explore
feeling. The gentle invitation to reveal himself stirs up feelings toward the
therapist. A small rise of these feelings often decreases his anxiety,
mobilizing his hope, energy, and motivation. Stop exploring feeling when it
doesn’t help, is too uncomfortable, or triggers anxiety over the threshold for
anxiety tolerance.
Restructuring the Pathway of Unconscious Anxiety Discharge
When anxiety goes over the threshold of anxiety tolerance, regulate it. If
it does not come down, try the following steps:
1. If the patient floods with anxiety, differentiate the observing ego and
the experiencing self (see chapter 2). Encourage him to step back
and take a look at the symptoms in the body. Help him see rather
than be the anxiety. Mutual attention to the physical experience of
anxiety forms a partnership for regulation. “When alone in the forest
at night we are afraid, but holding hands with another person makes
our anxiety go away. Anxiety is not overcome by force alone, but
through a regulating relationship” where both of us pay close,
careful, kind attention to the patient’s inner life. This partnership is
the necessary precondition for building the patient’s capacity
(Troendle 2005, my translation).
2. If he does not pay attention to his anxiety so it can get regulated,
address the character defenses by which he ignores his anxiety.
3. If he is barely breathing or has jumpy legs, address projections
perpetuating the anxiety (see chapter 2).
BREAKTHROUGH TO THE UNCONSCIOUS FOR THE
FRAGILE PATIENT
The first breakthrough to feeling will last for a second, involving merely
a tear or a flicker of sadness in the face. The patient can experience only a
tiny bit of his complex feelings without experiencing cognitive/perceptual
disruption. Work for multiple small, unremarkable breakthroughs to build
capacity gradually. As you do so, the therapy may look quite cognitive. The
first visualizations of the impulse may involve little experience of the rage.
The breakthroughs increase isolation of affect and bring anxiety over time
into the striated muscles.
Once the murderous rage has emerged, guilt and grief begin to pass. In
response, fragile patients may somatize, become depressed, project, or have
conversion symptoms. When this occurs, summarize what happened, and
modulate the affective experience to bring the patient’s anxiety back into
the striated muscles.
Premature breakthroughs to the unconscious lead to dissociation,
projection, and loss of reality testing (patients with cognitive/perceptual
disruption), depression and suicidality (depressed patients), somatization
(somatizing patients), panic attacks (panic patients), acting out (impulsive
patients), and increased resistance or premature termination. Always assess
the pathways of anxiety discharge and defense structure before pursuing a
breakthrough to unconscious feelings.
Limits of Self-Observing Capacity in the Fragile Patient
Always assess impulsivity with a fragile patient. A low self-observing
capacity means a low affect tolerance, which means low impulse control,
which means increased acting out. For instance, a patient was hesitant to
explore her rage. When the therapist asked if she had ever lost control of
her anger, she replied she had once stabbed someone! Assess the patient’s
impulse control inside and outside of the session. Signs of poor impulse
control include talking over you or interrupting you before you finish a
sentence, a raised voice, yelling, or cursing. Other signs include actions to
get rid of feeling experience such as moving arms around wildly, standing
up, or getting out of the chair to show you something.
In summary, restructure anxiety until it goes into the striated muscles.
Help patients see and let go of regressive defenses. Build the patient’s selfobserving capacity to get a consensus on the triangle of conflict and the
therapeutic task. Once you build these capacities, you can help the fragile
patient face her feelings as deeply as possible.
DEPRESSION
Depressed patients can face unconscious feelings quickly when anxiety
goes into the striated muscles, and they use repressive and tactical defenses.
Shift to the graded approach when anxiety goes into smooth muscles or
cognitive/perceptual disruption, or regressive defenses occur (Trunnell
1987). Help the patient regulate her anxiety and see the regressive defense.
Then show her causality (anger triggers these defenses, which make her
depressed). When anxiety returns to the striated muscles and she lets go of
the regressive defense, explore feeling again.
In the following excerpt, the therapist must help the patient first see the
defense, and then its price and function. Until the patient sees those three
things, she will not be able to let go of the defense to face the underlying
feelings.
Th: We see you feel this anger toward your boss, and as we explored
this anger toward your boss, do you notice how the anger goes back
onto you? [Defense: self-attack.]
Pt: But maybe I really am a terrible employee. [Defense: self-attack.]
Th: Notice how you are describing yourself right now? A moment ago,
you were feeling angry with your boss [point out the defense], and
then the next minute, do you see how the telescope shifts from him
back onto you? How you turn the focus onto you rather than let it
stay on him a minute longer?
Pt: I see what you mean now.
Th: When you shift this focus back onto yourself, could that be a way of
protecting him in this room from your anger? [Clarify the function
of the defense.]
Pt: Maybe.
Th: We see you feel this anger toward your boss. As we explored this
anger toward your boss, do you notice how your body suddenly
went weak on you? [Defense: conversion.] Notice how you
dropped your power there?
Pt: I do feel real tired now.
Th: You felt this anger toward him. It went back onto you. Then you got
tired. [Point out causality.] Would you be willing to power back up
so we could take a look at your power? [Encourage the patient to
turn against the defense and face her feeling instead.]
The patient must let go of defenses, which turn rage on the self.
Otherwise, each time the patient focuses on her rage, she will turn it against
herself, becoming more depressed and symptomatic. We use the graded
format to keep the fragile patient from flooding with anxiety and the
depressed patient from becoming overwhelmed by depression caused by
regressive defenses. Build her capacity to tolerate anger without turning it
on herself. At the slightest sign of a depression-causing defense, intervene
immediately to help her see and let go of it.
Depressed patients usually have trouble differentiating feeling from
anxiety and feeling from defense. Suppose the therapist asks, “What is the
feeling toward him for slapping you?”
Pt: I feel anxious. [Inability to differentiate feeling from anxiety.]
Th: That’s your anxiety. What is the feeling toward him that makes you
anxious?
Pt: I feel shut down. [Inability to differentiate feeling from defense.]
Th: Shutting down is not your feeling. [Differentiate defense from
feeling.] Shutting down is how you deal with your feeling. You shut
down. If you don’t shut down on your feeling, what is the feeling
toward him for slapping you? [Invite the patient to turn against her
defense and face her feeling.]
Pt: [Weepiness.] Angry. I wish I had him back. [Regressive defense:
weepiness.]
Th: Tears are not anger, are they? [Differentiate defense from feeling.]
Notice how the tears come in to cover your anger? [Clarify the
function of the defense.] If we don’t cover your anger with tears and
longing, can we take a look at the anger underneath? [Invite the
patient to turn against the defense and face her feeling.]
Carefully differentiate the patient’s feeling from defenses. Otherwise,
each time the therapist asks about feeling, the patient will respond with a
defense, becoming more depressed and symptomatic.
Each time you invite a feeling, the depressed patient will either become
anxious or use a defense that causes depression. Regulate the anxiety,
restructure the regressive defense, or build self-observing capacity. Then
invite the feeling again. Repeat until the patient can bear the full extent of
her feelings without anxiety going into the smooth muscles or
cognitive/perceptual disruption, or using regressive defenses.
Invite the Feeling
Continue inviting the feeling and building capacity until the patient can
bear the full extent of her feeling without getting depressed. Then a
breakthrough to the unconscious will be possible. Imagine turning the hose
on in your front yard only to discover it has so many leaks that water cannot
get to the nozzle. So you turn the water on briefly, see a leak, and turn off
the faucet. You patch the hose and then turn on the water again to find the
next leak. You keep turning the faucet on and off to identify and patch leaks
one by one. Eventually, it is safe to turn the water on all the way because it
will get to the end of the hose. Inviting feeling and building capacity are the
two basic interventions to use with depressed patients.
Depressed patients can have a moderately resistant, highly resistant,
fragile, or borderline level of character pathology. So assess the patient’s
capacities to develop a treatment plan that addresses the patient’s specific
problems of anxiety regulation, regressive defenses, and self-observing
capacity. In all cases of depression, regulate anxiety, build self-observing
capacity, address regressive defenses, and help the patient disidentify with
defenses.
The Graded Format: An Example
In the following vignette, a severely depressed woman has just
described an incident when her boyfriend insulted her in front of her
friends. Without even labeling her feeling, she begins to cry. Notice how the
therapist must help the patient see the regressive defense of weepiness and
let go of it before her anger can rise.
Th: As we step back for a moment, it sounds like you have a reaction to
him for talking that way. [Graded inviting of feeling.]
Pt: I just feel bad.
Th: A bad thing happened. What is your reaction to that? [Differentiate
the stimulus (what he did) from her feeling.]
Pt: I didn’t like it.
Th: Of course, what’s your thought about that? [Invite her to describe
her thought about the stimulus before we ask about her feeling.]
Pt: [Weepiness. Tears in her eyes.]
Th: Notice how these tears come in now as soon as we look at your
thought? Notice how these tears come in to wash away your
thought? [Point out causality.] Let’s take a few breaths to firm up
and take a look at this thought.
Pt: I think he shouldn’t have done it. [Weepiness: tears in her eyes.]
Th: So tears come in to wash away this thought. [Clarify the function of
the tears as defense.] Let’s see if we can put the tears to the side so
we can look at your thought. [Invite her to turn against the
defense.] This thought, “He shouldn’t have done it,” is that an
approving thought or a critical thought?
Pt: A critical thought.
Th: What do you notice sensing in your body as you let this critical
thought be in your mind?
Pt: I feel tightness in my chest.
Th: Just notice that sensation in your body as you let yourself hold a
critical thought. How would you label that sensation?
Pt: Irritated. [In a highly resistant patient, this is a tactical defense: a
cover word. In a severely depressed patient, this is a successive
approximation toward anger, so we support it.]
Th: You feel irritated toward him. What do you find irritating? [Asking
her to elaborate on the stimulus evokes feeling gradually, making it
easier for her to sense and label it correctly.]
Pt: It irritates me that he doesn’t listen to me and that he told me one
thing and did another.
Th: How do you experience that irritation in your body? [Invite the
feeling.]
Pt: [Her hands suddenly rise as if to strangle someone and then drop.] I
don’t know.
Th: I notice something in your hands there. [I mimic what her hands
did.] What do you notice?
Pt: [Smiles.] I don’t know. I feel irritated.
Th: How do you experience that irritation? [Invite the feeling.]
Pt: Anger?
In contrast to patients with a higher capacity, we might ask the
depressed patient to intellectualize about her irritation or the stimulus to
build her capacity to bear her feeling. Always work at the highest level of
feeling she can tolerate to build her capacity. When you work beneath her
capacity, no new learning will take place.
Depressed patients who face rage in the session may punish themselves
afterward, becoming depressed. To prevent destructive acting out after
sessions (1) turn the patient against self-attack before exploring rage; (2)
clarify causality; and (3) predict self-attack to prevent relapse.
Th: We have learned today that one way you deal with your anger is that
you turn it on yourself in the form of self-criticism. And we have
learned that another way you deal with your anger is to dismiss it as
if your feelings are no big deal. And we have noticed that turning
the anger onto yourself and dismissing your feelings make you
depressed. Given that you have faced a lot of rage today, how might
you be tempted to punish yourself after the session? [Invite the
patient to think about her defenses in advance to prevent relapse.]
Pt: In the past I would binge on food, or I would call a guy up to have
sex.
Th: And how would we understand that now?
Pt: That would be a way to punish myself.
Th: For what?
Pt: For this rage I just felt toward my dad? But why?
Th: You just said he called you a whore. If you go out and have sex, it’s
as if you say, “I would rather pretend to be a whore like you said,
Dad, rather than feel this rage toward you.”
Pt: Oh my God! That is so true. I would be doing what he said I was.
Th: That would be a way to punish yourself rather than feel the rage
toward him. If you don’t punish yourself now, how would you like
to handle your anger instead this week?
Pt: I have to stop treating myself like a whore and face my rage toward
my dad instead.
To prevent relapse, help the patient anticipate and plan for a relapse, that
is, the temptation to use a regressive defense. If the patient does not see and
turn against the defense of self-attack, she will attack herself after the
session and become more depressed. For instance, a therapist explored a
patient’s anger toward her mother but did not help her see and let go of her
self-attack. After the session, the patient cut herself.
As soon as the patient turns rage against herself, pause, and stop the
self-attack. Help her see the defense, then explore anger again. Repeat this
sequence until she can experience her rage deeply without anxiety and
defenses.
Depressed patients almost always use character defenses, that is, they
treat themselves as others did in the past. For instance, a young woman
dismissed herself just as her molesting father did. Rather than feel rage
toward him, she identified with him and turned the rage onto herself
through self-dismissal. By dismissing herself, she enacted her identification
with her dismissive father. (See chapter 12.)
As soon as the patient uses a character defense, help her see and let go
of the identification with the abuser so she can face her rage toward him
instead. She must let go of this defense before rage will be easily available.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for raping you?
Pt: I hate him. [Defense: said with a detached voice.]
Th: You say that with a detached voice. Do you notice that? [Defense
identification.]
Pt: It’s behind me. [Character defense: dismissing herself and her
feelings as her molesting father did to her.]
Th: You say the rape is behind you. You say the molestation of a
thirteen-year-old girl is behind you. You say your feelings are
behind you. Do you notice how you ignore, dismiss, and detach
from your feelings? [Point out the character defense. A molester
ignores, dismisses, and detaches from the feelings of his daughter.]
Pt: I didn’t do it on purpose.
Th: No, of course, you didn’t do it on purpose, but do you see how you
ignore, dismiss, and detach from your feelings?
Pt: Yes.
Th: Is that how you want to treat your feelings? Do you want to imitate
your father who ignored, dismissed, and detached from your
feelings? [Help her turn against the defense of identification.]
Pt: I sure don’t want to imitate him!
Th: If we don’t ignore your feelings or detach from them, can we have
an honest look at your feeling toward your father for robbing you of
your innocence? [Invite the patient to let go of the defense and face
her underlying feelings.]
If the patient continues to use character defenses, point them out. Often,
these patients will defend the people who abused them.
Pt: He had a bad childhood.
Th: Do you notice how you take his side instead of your own?
Or these patients judge themselves.
Pt: Maybe I was just a slut.
Th: Would you like to look at yourself through the eyes of his judgment
or through the lens of self-compassion?
Or these patients minimize what the abuser did, an identification with
the abuser.
Pt: It wasn’t that bad.
Th: Is that what you felt when he was raping you, or is that what he said
afterward?
Address each character defense until the patient can feel the full extent
of her rage toward the abuser without turning it against herself. When these
defenses are not addressed, the therapy remains stuck, or the patient attacks
herself after exploring her rage.
Another problem can occur if the therapist does not summarize what the
patient learned in the session. If the patient does not see her defense in the
moment or its price, she will keep using it and become depressed after the
session.
Th: As we faced this rage you feel toward your father, you dealt with it
by turning it on yourself. You are angry with him. Then we saw
how you got angry with yourself. You criticized him. Then you
began to criticize yourself. You judged his behavior. Then you
began to judge yourself. Do you see that sequence now as we look
back on it?
Pt: Yes, I do now. I just didn’t see it before.
Th: That’s why we need to take care to see what has been going on
outside your awareness. Once you can see this self-attack, you can
make a different choice about how to deal with your feelings.
Pt: That makes sense.
Th: Then we saw how this self-attack, self-criticism, and self-judgment
started to make you depressed here in the session. Do you see that
too?
Pt: Now I do.
Th: Based on what we’ve learned today, how might you deal with your
anger toward your father before I see you next time?
Pt: If the past is any indication, I might attack myself again.
Th: When that happens, what would be the healthy alternative to selfattack?
Pt: To just feel the rage toward my father?
Th: What do you think?
At the end of the session, summarize what you have learned and make
sure the patient sees her regressive defenses, their price, and causality: “You
punish yourself for the rage you feel toward your father. When you do that,
you abuse yourself as he did rather than feel the rage where it belongs.”
This understanding helps the patient let go of her self-destructive defenses,
preventing relapse.
Hopelessness
Depressed patients’ hopelessness can be the result of a defense, a
realistic assessment of a situation for which there is no hope, a transference
resistance in which the therapist is expected to hold the hope for the
relationship, or the result of not seeing causality.
In the following example, the patient’s hopelessness is due to a defense:
he engages in a hopeless strategy of denying reality. His girlfriend ended
their relationship, but rather than face his loss, he contacts her repeatedly.
Each time, she angrily tells him to leave her alone. The issue is not that the
relationship is hopeless. The patient’s strategy of denial is hopeless. The
patient feels rage toward the woman who dumped him, but rather than face
his rage and loss, he calls her up, inviting her to punish him. He complains
about how badly she treats him. All the while, he ignores how he
perpetuates his suffering by calling her repeatedly.
In another example, a patient’s hopelessness about her illness is a
realistic assessment. The patient has stage four cancer, which has
metastasized and is not responding to treatment. She faces a hopeless
prognosis. Her hopelessness is a realistic assessment of a medical condition
over which she has no control. The therapist can help her grieve the loss,
prepare for death, say goodbye to loved ones, and find meaning in her life.
Another patient declares that therapy is hopeless, asking the therapist to
prove to him why he should have hope. This is a transference resistance.
[Metacommunication: “I will take a passive/hopeless position. Breathe life
into me.”]
Defenses can create a hopeless situation. For instance, a woman is angry
with colleagues whom she accuses of using her. They made unreasonable
requests of her. Rather than face her anger, she covers it up by giving them
what they ask (reaction formation) and overextending herself (selfpunishment).
When the therapist asked about this pattern, the patient said she tried to
trust everyone. This is denial. Not all people can or should be trusted. After
many betrayals she said she felt hopeless about life. Her life was not
hopeless. Trusting untrustworthy people and hoping they will become
trustworthy is hopeless. Channeling anger into self-punishment creates a
hopeless result. Giving others what they want (while hoping they will give
you what you want) is a hopeless venture. When she could see that her
defenses created a hopeless situation, she could channel her anger more
adaptively.
Principle: Assess whether the patient’s hopelessness is a rational
response to a loss in reality or an irrational result of her
defenses.
In summary, depressed patients tolerate a low level of feeling before
they use regressive defenses that cause depression, such as turning on the
self, identifying with the object of one’s anger, conversion, weepiness,
cutting, and suicidal ideation. As soon as a patient uses a regressive
defense, stop exploring feeling. Offer a cognitive summary of what just
happened so he can see the defense, let go of it, and stop the slide into
depression in the moment. Once he can see the defense and turn against it,
invite him to face the feeling. Each time, he will be able to face increasing
amounts of feeling until he can bear the full amount of his rage without any
self-attack.
SOMATIZATION
Somatization refers to conditions where patients suffer from physical
symptoms without any identifiable medical cause. Understanding of this
condition has been hampered by three main problems. First, some have
assumed that patients are malingering when they suffer from genuine,
undiagnosed medical conditions. Second, therapists have failed to recognize
the precise relationships between bodily symptoms and the activation of the
somatic and autonomic nervous systems. Third, clinicians have failed to
differentiate bodily symptoms resulting from anxiety from those resulting
from the defense of somatization.
We will assume the patient has received a thorough evaluation, which
has found no medical cause for the symptoms. We will show the relations
between bodily symptoms and the somatic and autonomic nervous systems.
We will also show how to differentiate psychogenic from medically caused
symptoms. Finally, we will discuss how to treat symptoms resulting from
the defense of somatization. These contributions have allowed this
treatment model to treat psychosomatic problems effectively in a short-term
therapy format (Abbass 2005, 2007; Abbass et al. 2008; Abbass et al. 2009;
Frederickson 2005).
Patients who suffer from somatization disorder incur nine times the
health care expenses of the average American (Smith, Monson, and Ray
1986). They report being bedridden for two to seven days per month (Katon
et al. 1991). In one longitudinal study (Coryell and Norten 1981), only 31
percent recovered after fifteen years. They suffer side effects from
medication and stop using it. There is no effective pharmacological
treatment for somatizing disorders.
The diagnosis of somatization dates from the ancient Egyptians (see
Woolfolk and Allen 2007, for a brief review). The term somatization first
appears in the work of Stekel (1924, 341), referring to “the conversion of
psychological states into physical symptoms.” S. Freud and Breuer (1883–
1895/1974) thought that somatic symptoms resulted from traumatic
experiences hidden from consciousness. Freud believed that once patients
felt these unexpressed emotions, symptoms would disappear. Later, F.
Alexander (1950) differentiated between psychosomatic symptoms that
symbolically communicate or represent a psychological conflict and those
resulting from emotional arousal.
Symptoms Due to Unconscious Discharge of Anxiety
There are three patterns of somatic symptoms that result from anxiety
discharged through the somatic and autonomic nervous systems:
Striated muscle tension: Unconscious anxiety manifests in symptoms
of hand clenching, sighing, and hyperventilation. The chronic
tensing of the skeletal muscles can result in tension headaches (due
to muscle tension around the c1, c2, and c3 vertebrae), and pain in
the abdominal wall, chest, back, joints, limbs, and extremities
(Abbass et al. 2008). Chronic tensing of the pelvic muscles results in
painful sensations, painful menstruation, painful intercourse,
menstrual irregularity, and is a cause for vulvadynia. Muscle tension
can lead to a lump in the throat and difficulties in swallowing.
Psychosomatic fits or convulsions result when the patient
experiences an unconscious impulse combined with tension and
unconsciously holds back the impulse.
Excessive sympathetic nervous system activation: Symptoms include
urinary retention, constipation, dry eyes, and sensitivity to light due
to dilated pupils. Fainting, loss of consciousness, dizziness, and heart
palpitations can occur in response to excessive heart rate and
hyperventilation.
Excessive parasympathetic nervous system activation: Localized
weakness results from the loss of striated tension. The patient, weak
and unsteady on his feet (“jelly legs”), has trouble walking.
Deafness, ringing in the ears, blindness, blurry vision, and tunnel
vision are symptoms of cognitive/perceptual disruption. Fainting,
loss of consciousness, memory loss, amnesia, or dizziness can occur
due to hypoperfusion in the brain. Anesthesia or loss of sensation
can also occur. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal bloating, and
gas result from anxiety discharged into the gastrointestinal tract.
These forms of dysfunction can cause food intolerances. Abdominal
pain can result from the activation of the somatic nervous system
(tension in the abdominal wall) or parasympathetic nervous system
(nausea in the stomach). Always differentiate these two pathways of
anxiety discharge when assessing abdominal pain. Migraine
headaches take several forms, some of which can be triggered by the
discharge of anxiety into the parasympathetic nervous system.
Parasympathetic activation will cause symptoms of frequent and
sudden urges to urinate or defecate, difficulty breathing, and sick
tiredness. When asked, the patient will report that she doesn’t feel a
healthy tired sensation like after exercise but rather a sick tired
sensation (J. Ten Have de Labije, personal communication).
The chronic use of repressive defenses is associated with compromised
immune system function (Jamner, Schwartz, and Leigh 1988), elevated
blood pressure (King et al. 1990), pain severity for chronic pain patients
(Deschields et al. 1995), and irritable bowel symptoms (Toner et al. 1992).
Elevated sympathetic and parasympathetic discharge decreases immune
function (Schulkin 2004). Increased somatic nervous activation increases
pain sensitivity. Elevated sympathetic activation raises blood pressure.
Elevated parasympathetic activation causes irritable bowel symptoms.
Chronically elevated anxiety leads to functional symptoms as well as
dysfunction in multiple organ systems (Schulkin 2004). Many patients who
assume they have a chronic medical condition suffer from chronically
dysregulated anxiety.
Patients who use repressive defenses discharge their anxiety primarily in
the somatic and sympathetic nervous systems. They suffer from tension
headaches, back pain, and elevated blood pressure. Patients who use
repressive and some regressive defenses discharge their anxiety into the
somatic and parasympathetic nervous systems. They suffer from
gastrointestinal complaints, irritable bowel syndrome, and migraine
headaches. Patients who use regressive defenses and whose anxiety is
discharged into cognitive/perceptual disruption suffer from chronic fatigue,
dizziness, and problems in walking. They complain of negative feelings,
most of which result from regressive defenses such as externalization and
projection.
We can reduce anxiety symptoms through regulating anxiety and
inviting the underlying feeling. We can reduce somatizing symptoms by
helping the patient see and let go of his defense and then face his feelings.
The symptoms of classical somatization can be identified through two
clues. First, they often do not look like anxiety symptoms discharged
through the somatic and autonomic nervous systems. Second, they
symbolically express the identification with the body of the person toward
whom the patient experiences murderous rage.
Symptoms Due to Expression of Unconscious Conflict
Up to this point we have looked at somatic symptoms that result from
the discharge of anxiety through the somatic and autonomic nervous
systems. However, somatic symptoms can also occur due to the defense of
somatization—identifying with the body of the person toward whom the
patient feels rage. The following symptom pictures are consistent with the
defense of somatization.
Paralysis: Feeling rage toward the police, the patient becomes
paralyzed.
Anesthesia: Anesthesia can also result from an unconscious
identification. For instance, a patient reports no feeling in his arms.
Once he feels his murderous rage toward his ex-wife, in his fantasy
he imagines chopping her arms off. Afterwards he regains sensation
in his arms, and the therapist points out the identification with the
murdered figure. The patient identified with the wife as a
punishment for feeling rage toward her.
Abdominal pain: The patient imagines being angry with someone and
then reports a pain in his stomach. Later he imagines hitting his
father in the stomach. He wanted to hit his father but identified with
him and took the blow to the stomach himself.
Headache: A headache can also express a psychological conflict. A
patient expresses rage toward her ex-fiancé and then gets a
headache. Later she imagines murdering him by hitting him on the
head with a shovel. At that moment, her headache disappears.
When a headache symptom does not fit the form for a tension or
migraine headache, consider the possibility of the defense of
somatization. The patient reports unusual symptoms: “I feel like
something has cut straight through my head.” “I feel this stabbing
pain like a knife just went into the back of my head.”
Principle: If somatic symptoms result from anxiety in the striated
muscles, explore the feeling and address defenses. When
somatic symptoms result from anxiety in the smooth muscles
or cognitive/perceptual disruption, use the graded format and
restructure the pathway of anxiety discharge, and then
explore the feeling. When somatic symptoms result from the
defense of somatization, restructure that defense, and then
explore the feeling (table 7.2).
Table 7.2 How to eliminate somatic symptoms in patients
How to Assess Whether a Somatic Symptom Is Psychogenic or
Medically Caused
Current self-report measures cannot differentiate organic from
functional symptoms. In the past, if clinicians found no medical cause for a
symptom, they assumed it had a psychological cause. Rather than assume,
we can assess.
Watch the patient’s body to observe where anxiety is discharged. If
somatic symptoms rise and fall when feelings rise and fall, the symptoms
are psychosomatic. They are caused by anxiety or the defense of
somatization. If the symptoms do not shift in response to anxiety and
feeling, psychological causes do not play a role in symptom creation. Most
patients with somatic symptoms in a therapist’s office suffer from
symptoms resulting from unconscious anxiety (Abbass 2005, 2007; Abbass
et al. 2008) or the defense of somatization.
The following excerpt illustrates how somatic symptoms emerge in
response to a rise of unconscious feeling and anxiety in the body.
Vignette One: Migraine Headache
The patient’s anxiety went into her striated and smooth muscles for the
first few minutes of the initial session (she felt sick to her stomach). After
an hour into the session, we explore anger toward a past boyfriend who
abused her daughter.
Th: What is the feeling toward him?
Pt: I should have been there. [Defense: self-blame.]
Th: But the feeling toward him?
Pt: [Puts hand on her head.]
Th: What is happening?
Pt: I’m getting a migraine headache.
Th: Notice how this feeling comes up toward your boyfriend, and you
start to get a headache? [Point out causality.]
Pt: I get headaches a lot when there’s stress.
Th: And right now we see the stress is this feeling toward your
boyfriend, right?
Pt: Nods.
Th: And then when you feel this anger, notice how you get a headache
instead?
Vignette Two: Cognitive/Perceptual Disruption
In this vignette, the patient quickly experiences somatic symptoms due
to cognitive/perceptual disruption.
Th: You had invested all this time developing the school program. You
put several years of your life into this and then all of a sudden they
kicked you out. What is the feeling toward them for doing that to
you?
Pt: [Patient’s eyes go blank.]
Th: What is happening?
Pt: I feel really dizzy.
Th: That’s a sign of anxiety. Notice when we look at your feeling that
you get anxious and dizzy? [Point out causality.]
Pt: I don’t feel anxious, just dizzy.
Th: Do you notice how you get dizzy as soon as you look at the feeling
toward these people?
Pt: I do now. I don’t know what it means.
Th: Let’s find out. If it happens again, we’ll know that you get dizzy
when you have a feeling. Are you aware of your vision being blurry
right now?
Pt: Yes.
Th: That’s another sign of anxiety.
Pt: I must be anxious a lot because I always get blurry vision.
Explore the patient’s difficulties until anxiety goes into the smooth
muscles or cognitive/perceptual disruption. Then help her see causality:
feeling triggers anxiety symptoms. In the here and now, the therapist and
patient can assess the psychological significance of the patient’s symptoms.
If the patient disagrees, the therapist can say, “You may be right. I may be
wrong. Let’s just flag this, and, if it happens again, we’ll find out together if
this is a pattern.” With each rise of feeling, the patient’s symptoms rise
again. Show causality so she can recognize how feeling triggers her bodily
symptoms. This mobilizes her to face her feelings.
Patients who somatize as an expression of psychological conflict need a
different approach. The defense of somatization often involves rage toward
someone who hurt the patient. In response to a rise of feeling, the patient
identifies with the body of the person toward whom she feels rage. A
patient wants to cut off her father’s arms and then feels as if her arms are
not attached to her body. The patient unconsciously identifies with the body
of the person she wanted to attack. The conscious painful symptom in her
body corresponds to the unconscious attack on the other person’s body. The
patient unconsciously protects the other person by turning the attack on her
own body. Help her face this rage as deeply as possible without somatizing
so she can access the unconscious mixed feelings toward the hated figure.
By experiencing those feelings, she will no longer need to use the defense
of somatization.
Somatization can also be a defense against loss. A woman whose
mother died of lung cancer coughed whenever she began to grieve. By
“becoming” her mother through her health problem, she could avoid saying
goodbye.
To assess somatization, notice causality. In what context does the
symptom occur? For instance, a woman felt nauseous and dizzy around
dinnertime. Medical assessment found nothing unusual. When asked what
happened at dinner, she said nothing happened. On further inquiry,
however, she reported that just before dinner her angry husband came home
and verbally abused her. One man reported constant tension headaches. His
wife raged at him constantly. When she left home to go on a trip, his
headaches stopped.
Principle: Ask what the feeling is toward the other person and observe
feelings, anxiety, and defense. If somatization is an issue,
somatic symptoms will rise when feelings rise in the session.
Vignette One: The Defense of Somatization
The patient is feeling murderous rage toward his physically abusive
father. Notice how the patient identifies with the object of his rage and
suffers a somatic symptom as a result.
Th: How does this rage go out onto him?
Pt: I punch him right in the face just like he used to do to me.
Th: Mhmm. And then?
Pt: I hit him again, and he falls over.
Th: Mhmm.
Pt: And then I see an ax, and I pick it up and chop him right down the
middle of his skull.
Th: Mhmm, and what does he look like now?
Pt: Ooof. I’ve really got a splitting headache right now. [Defense:
somatization.]
Th: Isn’t that interesting? You just chopped him in the head, but who
gets the headache? [Point out causality.]
Pt: What?
Th: You just chopped him in the head, but who got the headache?
Pt: I did.
Th: See how you chopped him in the head, but then you turn the rage
onto your head instead so it’s your head that’s split instead of his?
[Point out the defense of somatization.]
Pt: Oh, wow! I didn’t see that.
Th: If we don’t put the rage on your head, how else does this rage need
to go out onto him? [Invite him to turn against the defense and face
his feeling instead.]
Pt: I need to finish chopping him up.
Th: How do you picture that?
Vignette Two: The Defense of Somatization
The patient struggles with rage toward her son who has jeopardized his
career through an illegal act, which has drawn the attention of the police.
Again, we see someone who identifies with the object of her rage and
suffers a somatic symptom as a result.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for doing that?
Pt: I’m angry.
Th: How do you experience that anger physically in your body?
Pt: I just feel limp. It’s as if I cannot move my arms or legs. I’m so
tired. [Defense: somatization.]
Th: But tired is not anger, is it? [Differentiate the defense from her
feeling.]
Pt: No.
Th: Tired is a way to cover your anger. [Clarify the function of the
defense.] If we don’t cover your anger with tired, how do you
experience this anger toward him?
I continue focusing on her anger and addressing her defenses until she
describes her rageful impulse.
Th: And how does this rage go out onto him?
Pt: I don’t know why, but I want to take an ax to him and chop his arms
and legs off so he can’t do anything wrong again.
Th: And then?
Pt: I feel so tired all of a sudden. It’s like I can’t move. [Defense:
somatization.]
Th: Isn’t that interesting? As soon as you chop off his arms and legs so
he can’t move, who can’t move now? [Point out the defense of
somatization.]
Pt: I can’t move.
Th: As soon as you chop off his hands and arms, you chop off your
own, and you become the chopped-up body, the exhausted body,
and the body that can’t move. You put all the rage onto your body
instead of feeling it toward him. Do you see what I mean?
Pt: [She sits up in the chair.]
Th: It’s important we face this rage toward him in fantasy because you
have been chopping yourself up in reality, becoming the dead
woman. If you don’t turn the rage onto your body, how does the
rest of your rage want to go out on him?
Pt: [Her fists rise.] I want to hit him for everything he did to me.
Th: How do you picture that in your mind?
After the breakthrough to her rage, I pointed out how she became the
woman without arms and legs as soon as she said she felt angry with her
son. Help the patient see the links between her conscious symptom and
unconscious rage, guilt, and grief so she can overcome her defense of
somatization.
Tension Headaches
Although headaches are usually listed as a form of somatization, we
must differentiate three different types according to their cause: anxiety,
somatization, and medical conditions.
Tension headaches result from anxiety discharged into the somatic
nervous system, creating tension affecting the c1, c2, or c3 vertebrae. These
patients have difficulty moving the head and neck. When anxious, they
become tense in the neck, face, scalp, and jaw, and they feel pressure on the
forehead, the neck, the sides of the head, or a tightening around the head.
They are often sensitive to light, due to pupils dilated by the sympathetic
nervous system.
Tension headaches result from anxiety, not the defense of somatization.
Help the patient experience his rage; his anxiety will drop, and the headache
will disappear. Always ask about the event that occurred just before the
headache. Explore the feelings in the conflictual situation. As you do so, the
patient will become tense. If a tension headache occurs during the session,
point out causality and invite feeling until feelings come out and the
patient’s headache stops.
Migraine Headaches
Many migraine headaches are purely medical in origin. We will explore
only those that arise in response to emotional triggers. Migraine headaches
are vascular headaches. In the brain, blood vessels traveling within the
meninges start to throb with pain when their nerve fibers are activated. The
blood vessels narrow, decreasing the flow of blood and oxygen to the brain.
To compensate, other blood vessels open wider, increasing blood flow.
Patients who suffer from smooth muscle discharge of unconscious
anxiety often have migraines in response to a rise of feeling. As soon as a
migraine appears, summarize the conflict in the here and now. “You are
feeling angry toward your boss, and this makes you anxious. Is there
anywhere else that you notice this anxiety in your body? Can you describe
those sensations in your body?” Keep the patient’s attention on anxiety until
the migraine disappears. Then point out causality. “You were feeling anger
toward your boss. The anger made you anxious, and the anxiety triggered
the migraine. Shall we take another look at this anger? Wouldn’t it be nice
just to feel your anger so you wouldn’t have to have a headache instead?
How else do you experience this anger toward your boss?”
Always regulate anxiety and point out causality at the slightest sign of a
migraine so it does not worsen. Gentle invitation to the feeling raises the
amount of feeling and anxiety the patient can tolerate before anxiety shifts
into the smooth muscles. Boost the patient’s capacity for affect tolerance to
reduce the frequency of migraines.
Explore feelings in the session to differentiate psychogenic from
medically caused migraines. Psychogenic migraines appear in response to a
rise of feeling and anxiety. In any case, patients suffering from migraines
should be thoroughly evaluated by a medical professional.
Somatization Headaches
These headaches usually occur as soon as the patient’s rage or impulse
rises. Point out how she experienced her rage just before the headache.
When we see the impulse toward the head of the other person, make the
cognitive link.
Th: You wanted to chop him in the head, but then you gave yourself this
splitting headache instead. Do you see how you turned the rage
toward him onto your head instead?
Principle: Point out how her guilt over her rage led her to identify with
the body of the person she wanted to attack. This cognitive
summary helps her see causality and turns her against the
defense of somatization.
SUMMARY
Psychosomatic symptoms result from the discharge of anxiety in the
body or the defense of somatization. To assess a symptom, explore a
conflictual situation and ask about the patient’s feeling. When symptoms
increase in response to a rise of anxiety, they are psychogenic. If no change
occurs in response to a rise of feeling and anxiety, physical symptoms are
most likely medically caused.
Principle: Ask about feelings until the patient starts to have a somatic
symptom. Pause and summarize the triangle of conflict so the
patient can see causality. This intervention allows anxiety to
drop and symptoms to decrease.
Th: You were feeling angry toward your boss. Then you became
anxious and got sick to your stomach. So we see a link between
feeling angry and getting anxious in your stomach. Do you see that
too?
When somatic symptoms result from the defense of somatization, invite
feeling until the defense of somatization occurs. Immediately restructure the
defense. Otherwise, more severe symptoms will result. Once the patient
sees the defense and the symptoms drop, invite feeling within that example,
so the patient can bear more intense feeling without the defense of
somatization. A breakthrough allows the patient to experience the link
between her unconscious feelings and her defense of identifying with the
person toward whom she felt rage. Understanding this link enables the
patient to overcome the defense of somatization.
Once the patient can see causality and the symptom disappears, explore
the feeling again, each time increasing the patient’s ability to tolerate her
feeling until her anxiety is no longer discharged into bodily symptoms. For
patients whose symptoms result from the defense of somatization, the
cognitive summary explains how the defense works. When the patient can
see that sequence and her symptom disappears, invite the feeling so the
patient can tolerate her rage without using the defense of somatization.
When anxiety goes into the striated muscles, explore the feeling and
restructure defenses until the patient experiences a breakthrough to the
feeling, at which point the symptoms will drop.
The fragile spectrum includes fragile, depressed, somatizating, and
impulsive patients. These patients need the graded approach to restructure
the pathway of unconscious anxiety discharge, so anxiety goes into the
striated muscles. They use regressive defenses, which the therapist must
restructure to establish an intrapsychic focus. All of these patients have
problems in self-observing capacity, which we will examine in the next
chapter.
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Abbass, A. (2005). Somatization: Diagnosing it sooner through emotionfocused interviewing. Journal of Family Practice, 54(3), 215–224.
Abbass, A., Kisely, S., and Kroenke, K. (2009). Short-term psychodynamic
psychotherapy for somatic disorders. Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics, 78, 265–274.
Abbass, A., Lovas, D., and Purdy, A. (2008). Direct diagnosis and
management of emotional factors in chronic headache patients.
Cephalagia, 28(12), 1305–1314.
Davis, D. (1988). Transformation of pathological mourning into acute grief
with intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy. International Journal
of Short-Term Psychotherapy, 3, 79–97.
Davis, D. (1988). Transformation of pathological mourning into acute grief
with intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy, part II. International
Journal of Short-Term Psychotherapy, 3, 279–298.
Frederickson, J. (2007). The man who awoke from a coma: Treatment of a
dissociative patient. http://www.istdpinstitute.com/resources/.
Trunnell, T. (1987). The management of the mechanisms of depression in
intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy. International Journal of
Short-Term Psychotherapy, 2, 1–15.
Whittemore, J. (1996). Paving the royal road: An overview of conceptual
and technical features in the graded format of Davanloo’s ISTDP.
International Journal of Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy, 11, 21–
39.
RECOMMENDED MATERIALS
You may want to view the following videos to better understand how to
work with fragile patients.
Working with the fragile patient. A set of DVDs including the initial
session, a teaching DVD, and an analyzed transcript of the session at
http://www.istdpinstitute.com/DVD/.
Restructuring projection with a borderline patient. A set of DVDs including
the initial session, a teaching video on projection, and an analyzed
transcript of the session at http://www.istdpinstitute.com/DVD/.
T
CHAPTER EIGHT
Building Self-Observing Capacity
he triangle of conflict tells us where to focus: feeling, anxiety, or
defense. Self-observing capacity tells us the extent to which the
patient can bear his feeling, regulate his anxiety, and let go of his
defenses.
Moderately resistant patients can observe their feelings, anxiety, and
defenses with some help from the therapist. However, patients in the fragile
spectrum and highly resistant patients often cannot observe or pay attention
to their feelings, anxiety, or defenses.
If a patient cannot observe his feelings, he can’t experience them. If he
cannot observe or pay attention to his anxiety, he cannot regulate it. If he
cannot differentiate his feelings from anxiety, he will become more anxious
when you ask about feelings. If he cannot differentiate his feelings from
defenses, he will become more defensive when you ask about feelings. If he
cannot see how his defenses create his presenting problem, he will see no
reason to let go of them. Therefore, we have to mobilize all of these
capacities before the patient can experience a breakthrough to his
unconscious feelings (S. Freud 1923/1961c; A. Freud 1936). The patient is
unaware of his feelings because defenses prevent him from observing and
paying attention to them.
During the phases of inquiry and invitation to feeling, assess each
patient response for his self-observing capacities (A. Freud 1936) in this
order (Ten Have de Labije 2006):
1. Observation: Can the patient observe his feeling, anxiety, and
defenses in the moment?
2. Attention: Can the patient pay attention to his feelings, anxiety, and
defenses in the moment?
3. Differentiation: Can the patient differentiate his feelings from
anxiety and defense?
4. Causality: Can the patient see that his feeling triggers anxiety which
triggers defense in the moment? Can he see how his defenses create
his presenting problems?
5. Syntonicity: Does he identify with his defenses, or does he see that
his defenses are how he avoids his feelings? Does he feel sadness or
guilt over the suffering he has inflicted on himself through his
defenses so he can turn against them?
Psychodiagnosis of each patient response determines the next
intervention. If the patient cannot declare an internal problem or express his
will to explore it, assess the anxiety and defenses that prevent him from
doing so. If he cannot label his feeling or experience it, assess the anxiety
and defenses that prevent him from doing so. Assess his capacity to observe
and pay attention to the defenses that prevent him from labeling and
experiencing his feeling. Also assess his ability to differentiate feeling from
anxiety and defense. Before confronting the resistance, assess his awareness
of causality, and the syntonicity of his defenses. After each patient response,
assess his self-observing capacity. Intervene, and then assess his next
response to intervention.
ELEMENTS OF SELF-OBSERVING CAPACITY
Many patients cannot observe, pay attention to, or experience their
feelings without excessive anxiety. First strengthen patients’ capacity for
observation and attention so they can turn against the defenses. This process
of building capacity in patients is called restructuring (Davanloo 1990).
Davanloo (1990, 2000) described restructuring in terms of separating
the ego and superego, differentiating the corners of the triangle, and
separating the patient from the resistance. Ten Have de Labije (1999, 2005)
described restructuring as the development of specific self-observing
capacities. Neuroscientists and psychoanalysts understand this in terms of
differentiating the patient from defenses (procedural memory) (Grigsby and
Stevens 2000).
Today nearly all models of psychotherapy agree on the central role of
the patient’s attention and awareness. How do we understand the observing
ego (S. Freud 1923/1961c) today? From the perspective of neuroscience
(Grawe 2007; Grigsby and Stevens 2000) and complexity theory (Palombo
1999), there is not a thing in the brain called the ego. Instead, the capacities
we put under the rubric of ego are emergent properties of complex
interactions between different parts of the brain. Thus, the perspectives of
neuroscience and complexity theory allow us to understand the emergence
of self-observing capacities without a reified concept of the ego.
The following case vignettes show how to mobilize self-observing
capacities. They must be mobilized in sequence because each capacity
builds on the previous ones.
Principle: After each response of the patient assess the problem of selfobserving capacity in that moment. Intervene to address that
problem and listen to the patient’s response to intervention.
Assess the next problem of self-observing capacity. Continue
to assess and build the patient’s self-observing capacities
until she can tolerate a breakthrough to unconscious feelings
without excessive anxiety.
Observation
Can the patient observe her feeling, anxiety, and defense in the present
moment?
Vignette One: Lack of the Ability to Observe Anxiety
In this excerpt you will see how the therapist assesses the patient’s
responses and sees her inability to observe her anxiety. The therapist
mobilizes this capacity before doing anything else in therapy. Without the
ability to observe and regulate anxiety, the highly anxious patient will not
be able to co-create an effective therapeutic alliance.
Th: What’s the internal emotional problem you would like me to help
you with?
Pt: [Racing speech.] There are a lot of things. I don’t know if you read
my chart, and then there’s more than that since I met with the
doctor.
Th: [Interrupt her racing speech.] Do you mind if I interrupt you for a
moment?
Pt: No. What?
Th: [Speak very slowly to slow the patient down.] Do you notice that
you are talking really quickly right now? [Identify her defense of
racing speech.]
Pt: I talk rapidly all the time. People are always telling me to slow
down. [She observes the defense, but it is syntonic.]
Th: [Interrupt the racing speech again.] And we see that racing speech
right now. You see, racing speech is often a way to run over
feelings and anxiety. [Show its defensive function.] But if you race
over and ignore your anxiety, it will just get worse. Our task here is
to pay close attention to feelings in your body, anxiety in your body,
and any shifts in our connection so we can see what is causing your
difficulties. [Mobilize her to the therapeutic task.] I’m going to
invite you to slow down. If you don’t race and don’t cover your
feelings with words, what do you notice feeling inside?
Pt: My head is full of thoughts wanting to come out. [Her speech races
again as she uses the defense of verbal discharge to avoid feelings
in her body.]
Th: What do you notice feeling in your body now, if we don’t race over
it? [Help her observe her anxiety.]
Pt: Real anxious. [Now she can observe her anxiety. The therapist
intervenes before the patient’s next defense.]
Th: Where do you notice this anxiety in your body right now? [Help the
patient keep observing her anxiety.]
Pt: I’m feeling sick to my stomach.
Racing speech prevents patients from seeing or regulating their anxiety.
This results in worsening symptoms. Immediately interrupt this defense and
mobilize attention to anxiety. Racing speech is not free association. It is a
sign of unregulated anxiety, which makes the patient unable to observe or
pay attention to her anxiety or engage in true self-reflection in that moment.
Any time patients present with unregulated anxiety in the session, (1) block
defenses that prevent anxiety regulation; (2) present the therapeutic task
(attention to her feelings, anxiety, and defenses); (3) draw attention to the
anxiety until it is regulated; (4) point out the feeling that triggers the
anxiety; (5) differentiate feeling from anxiety; and then (6) invite the
feeling.
Vignette Two: Lack of an Ability to Observe a Defense
In this example, the therapist assesses the patient’s response and sees the
patient’s inability to observe a defense. The therapist will help the patient
observe the defense before doing anything else. As long as the patient does
not observe the defense, he will keep using it and become depressed in
session.
Th: How do you experience this anger toward Jim for insulting you?
Pt: I was a stupid jerk to go to that bar in the first place. [Rather than
describe his anger, the patient uses the defense of self-attack.]
Th: Do you notice you put yourself down right now? [Draw attention to
his defense.]
Pt: No. [The patient has no ability to observe his defense of turning
anger on himself.]
Th: Do you notice you are calling yourself a name now?
Pt: Yes, but I think it’s true. [He cannot observe the defense. He can see
he calls himself a name, but he does not see the function that
serves: to turn anger toward Jim back onto himself.]
Th: Do you notice when this anger comes up toward Jim, there’s a
critical part of your mind that turns the anger toward him back onto
you instead?
Pt: I don’t understand. [He cannot observe his defense.]
Th: Do you notice how when this anger comes up toward Jim, a critical
part of your mind turns the criticism back onto you instead of onto
him? [Help him observe the defense of turning anger on himself.]
Pt: You mean I criticize me instead of him? [Now he sees the defense.]
Th: Yes, you criticize yourself instead of him. Do you think that might
hurt you, get you feeling down? [See if he can observe causality:
defenses create his depression.]
Pt: I think it definitely hurts me.
In this example, the patient initially does not observe his defense of selfattack. Point out this defense from different vantage points until he sees it.
Otherwise, it will make him depressed, and he will be unable to face his
rage toward Jim.
Spectrum of the Ability to Observe a Defense in Depressed Patients
The capacity to observe a defense exists on a spectrum from complete
awareness of the defense to none. If you are aware of where the patient is
on the spectrum of syntonicity, you can target your interventions to the
patient’s level of awareness and meet her where she is.
“I hate myself.” Psychodiagnosis: Self-attack with an implicit
awareness of the feeling involved and where she directs it. The
patient is not aware of her rage toward her boyfriend, her anxiety, or
defense.
“I’m upset with him, but I’m angry at myself.” Psychodiagnosis: She
has a muted awareness of her feeling, but not of her anxiety or
defense.
“I feel he shouldn’t have done that.” Psychodiagnosis: No selfattack. Defense: intellectualization. The patient is not aware of her
feeling, anxiety, or defense.
“I’m miffed.” Psychodiagnosis: No self-attack. Defense:
minimization. Patient has a muted awareness of her feeling, but not
of her anxiety or defense.
“I’m angry, but I don’t notice feeling anything.” Psychodiagnosis:
No self-attack. Defense: isolation of affect (she is aware of her
feeling without experiencing it). The patient is aware of her feeling
but not her anxiety or defense.
“I’m angry and I feel a heat rising up within me.” [Fists clenched.]
Psychodiagnosis: The patient is aware of her feeling, feels her rage
physiologically without any defenses, and experiences the impulse in
her fists.
Diagnosis tells us about the depression created by defenses.
Psychodiagnosis tells which defenses create the depression.
Vignette Three: Lack of the Ability to Observe a Feeling
In this excerpt, notice how the therapist assesses the patient’s responses
and sees her inability to observe a feeling due to defenses. The therapist will
help the patient see and let go of each defense so she can become aware of
the feeling underneath.
Th: What is your feeling toward him for pushing you out of the car?
Pt: I don’t know. [Lack of the ability to observe feeling.]
Th: Would you like to know what you are feeling so we can find out
what’s driving this anxiety? [Mobilize the will to observe her
feelings.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: What’s the feeling toward him for pushing you out of the car?
[Invite the feeling.]
Pt: I didn’t like it. [Defense: intellectualization.]
Th: That’s your thought. [Identify the defense.] If we don’t cover the
feeling with a thought, what’s the feeling toward him for pushing
you out of the car? [Invite the feeling.]
Pt: I thought he was wrong to do that. [Defense: intellectualization.]
Th: That’s your thought [identify defense], but if you don’t cover your
feeling with a thought, what’s the feeling toward him for pushing
you out of the car? [Differentiate the feeling from the defense, and
then invite the feeling.]
Pt: I guess I’m angry. [She is finally able to observe her feeling, but she
uses the defense of vagueness.]
Th: You guess? [Point out the defense of vagueness.] Either you are or
you aren’t. It doesn’t make a difference to me. [Block the defense.]
Pt: No, it’s true. I’m angry with him for doing that. [Now she can
observe her feeling. Next ask, “How do you experience this anger
physically in your body?”]
Attention
First mobilize observation and then attention to feeling, anxiety, or
defense in this moment.
Vignette One: Lack of Ability to Pay Attention to Feeling
Notice how the therapist assesses the patient’s responses and sees that
the patient is unable to pay attention to her feelings for more than a second
before using a defense. Thus, the therapist will focus on the defenses that
prevent the patient from paying attention to her feelings.
Th: What did you feel toward him when he pushed you out of the car?
Pt: I was angry, but the thing I want to talk about is this test next week.
[She observes her feeling for one second and then ignores it. No
ability to pay attention to her feeling.]
Th: Do you notice you avoid this feeling of anger? [Point out the
defense of diversification.]
Pt: No. [She does not observe her defense.]
Th: Do you notice you said you feel angry with him? [Point out the
sequence of feeling and defense.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: As soon as you said you feel angry, you talked about the test
instead. You moved away from your anger. Do you see that? [Point
out, and then see if she can observe, the sequence of feeling and
defense.]
Pt: Now that you point it out, but I did want to talk about the test. [She
sees the sequence, but not the defensive function of talking about
the test: to avoid her anger.]
Th: But do you see how talking about the test is a way to move away
from your anger? [Point out the defensive function.]
Pt: Yes. [The patient sees the function of talking about the test: to avoid
her anger. The defense is syntonic since she still wants to talk about
the test and ignore her feeling.]
Th: Is this a habit you have of distracting yourself from your anger and
ignoring it? [Point out the defense of ignoring her feeling.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: Does that help you channel your anger in a healthy direction or is it
getting in your way? [Separate the patient from her defenses.]
Pt: I can see how it gets in my way. [She sees the destructive effect of
ignoring her feelings.]
Th: If we don’t ignore your feelings, how do you experience this anger
toward him for pushing you out of the car? [Invite her to turn
against the defense and pay attention to her feeling.]
Vignette Two: Lack of Ability to Pay Attention to Anxiety
If the patient cannot pay attention to her anxiety, she will be unable to
regulate it or recognize the triggering feeling. Notice how the therapist
assesses the patient’s responses and sees that the patient is unable to pay
attention to her anxiety due to defenses, which distract her attention. Thus,
the therapist will help the patient see and let go of defenses, which help her
ignore her anxiety. Once she no longer ignores her anxiety, she will be able
to regulate it and explore her feeling.
Th: Are you aware of feeling anxious?
Pt: Yes, but I’m better at getting rid of it now. [She observes her anxiety
for a moment and then ignores it.]
Th: You are aware of your anxiety. How do you experience it?
Pt: All over, but I’m over it now. I’m okay. [She observes her anxiety
but cannot pay attention to it. Instead, she uses the defense of
denial.]
Th: But you look and sound quite anxious. [Point out the patient’s
denial.] Do you notice the anxiety in your body right now? [Invite
her attention to the anxiety.]
Pt: That’s true, but—
Th: [Interrupts the defense.] It’s good that you notice. As we notice your
anxiety, what do you notice in your neck? [Mobilize attention to her
anxiety.]
Pt: Tension. [Anxiety.]
Th: That’s a sign of anxiety. And in your shoulders?
Pt: Tension.
Th: That’s another sign of anxiety. And your arms?
Pt: Tension.
Th: And in your legs?
Pt: Tension.
Th: And how is your stomach? [Her anxiety goes into the striated
muscles. The therapist assesses if the patient’s anxiety is discharged
in other channels.]
Pt: I’m sick to my stomach. [Smooth muscles. Anxiety is too high.]
Th: Are you feeling nauseous?
Pt: Yes, but I do a lot of the time. [Smooth muscles. Defense of ignoring
her anxiety.]
Th: That’s another sign of anxiety. You are feeling anxiety in your
shoulders, arms, legs, and stomach. [Label her anxiety.] How is
your vision right now? [Assess whether she is suffering from
cognitive/perceptual disruption.]
Pt: It’s fine. Well, it’s blurry, but it’s like that a lot of the time.
[Cognitive/perceptual disruption.]
Th: That’s another sign of anxiety. How is your hearing?
Pt: It’s fine.
Th: Are you experiencing any dizziness?
Pt: A little bit. [Cognitive/perceptual disruption.]
Th: And how is your thinking right now? [Assess if she is experiencing
cognitive/perceptual disruption in the form of dissociation, drifting
thoughts, blanking out, or confusion.]
Pt: It’s a little cloudy. [Cognitive/perceptual disruption.]
Th: You are feeling anxiety in the form of tension in your shoulders,
arms, and legs. You feel anxiety in the form of nausea in your
stomach, and blurry vision, dizziness, and a little problem thinking.
Do you see that now?
Pt: Yes.
Th: I’m going to invite you to join me here in paying close attention to
the feelings in your body, the anxiety in your body, and any shifts in
our connection [defenses] so we can see what’s driving all this
anxiety and these symptoms. [Clarify the therapeutic task for the
patient: to pay attention to her internal experience.] Does that
make sense to you?
Pt: Yes. But there’s something else I would like to talk about. [Defense
of ignoring her anxiety.]
Th: If we go to another topic, we would be ignoring your anxiety, and
you would keep suffering from these symptoms. Would you like me
to help you get rid of these symptoms?
Pt: Yes.
Th: Could we take a minute to pay close attention to these feelings and
anxiety so we can see what’s driving this anxiety? [Mobilize the
patient’s will to engage in the therapeutic task.]
Pt: Yes. [Patient relaxes a bit in the chair.]
Th: What do you notice feeling right now?
Pt: A little more calm. [Mobilizing the patient’s will deactivates the
projection of her will onto the therapist, thereby reducing her
projective anxiety.]
Th: How do you notice that calm? [Mobilize the patient’s attention.]
Pt: I’m less tense.
Th: How is your vision? [Mobilize attention to her bodily experience.]
Pt: It’s fine now. [Cognitive/perceptual disruption has disappeared.]
Th: And how is your stomach?
Pt: It’s fine now. [Smooth muscle discharge of anxiety has stopped.]
Th: Do you notice tension instead?
Pt: Yes, but it’s not as bad as before. [Anxiety goes into the striated
muscles instead of smooth muscles or cognitive/perceptual
disruption.]
Th: Do you notice that when you ignore your anxiety it gets worse, but
when we pay attention to your anxiety it goes down? [Defenses
dysregulate anxiety; attention regulates it.]
Pt: I hadn’t noticed that before.
Th: Do you see that connection now?
Pt: Yes.
Th: Would you like to see what the feeling is underneath that is driving
this anxiety and creating these symptoms? [Invite the patient to pay
attention to the feelings triggering her anxiety.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: What is the feeling here toward me that is making you so anxious?
[Since she began the session feeling anxious with the therapist, ask
about feelings toward the therapist that are triggering this anxiety.]
Therapists often ask, “Why do you assume it is a feeling toward the
therapist?”
Imagine a dog that has been abused by a previous owner. When you
approach the dog behind the fence, he barks at you. Since the previous
owner abused him, the dog reacts with powerful feelings toward anyone
who approaches him. Unable to hide his feelings, the dog needs a fence to
keep from biting you. Patients who were hurt by others have these same
powerful reactions and feelings. In contrast to a dog, they do not need a
fence. They need defenses to keep them from expressing those ferocious
feelings.
Vignette Three: Lack of Attention to Defense
Notice how the therapist assesses the patient’s responses and sees that
the patient is unable to pay attention to her defenses. Thus, the therapist
helps the patient see and pay attention to her defenses. Otherwise, the
patient would not let go of the defenses, and she would be unable to cocreate a collaborative therapeutic alliance.
Th: What is your feeling toward him for slapping you?
Pt: I was surprised, but then I just ignored him. [Defense. She does not
describe her feeling, but how she ignored him and her feeling
toward him for slapping her.]
Th: But ignoring him is not your feeling. Ignoring is how you dealt with
your feeling. You ignored it. Do you see that? [Differentiate her
feeling from her defense.]
Pt: Yes, but I just don’t see the point in looking at this. [She observes
her defense, but pays no attention to it, the symptoms it causes, or
the price she pays for using it.]
Th: You ignore your feelings.
Pt: Yes, I see no point in getting all caught up in feelings. [She observes
her defense but points out that it is syntonic for her.]
Th: You see no point in paying attention to your feelings. You see no
point in me paying attention to your feelings. You invite me to
ignore your feelings too! What kind of therapist would I be if I said,
“Oh, we should ignore your feelings”? [Point out how her defense
invites us to form a pathological relationship where neither of us
pays attention to her inner life.]
Pt: Not a very nice one.
Th: Why would you want to do that to yourself? [Invite her to take a
stand against ignoring her feelings.]
Pt: It’s not like I want that. [She wants a healthy relationship but does
not see how she invites an unhealthy one.]
Th: That’s why we have to look at this. You don’t want a relationship
where both of us agree to ignore your feelings, but when you ignore
your feelings, you invite both of us to do just that: to dismiss and
ignore your feelings [Point out the effect of the defense on our
relationship.] Do you see what I mean?
Pt: Yes, I just hadn’t thought about it before. [She had not seen
causality: her defenses create pathological relationships and
presenting problems.]
Th: As we think about this, what can we do about this destructive habit
you’ve had of ignoring your feelings? [Invite her to turn against
her defense of ignoring.] Because you see, as long as you ignore
your feelings and invite me to ignore them, we’ll have the same
terrible relationship you had with your mother. [Point out the price
of her defense.] Why do that to yourself? [Invite her to take a stand
against the defense.]
Pt: I don’t want to.
Th: What can we do about this habit of ignoring your feelings? [Invite
her to take a stand against the defense.]
Pt: I don’t want to ignore my feelings, and I don’t want you to do that.
[She turns against the defense.]
Th: If you don’t ignore your feelings [encourage her to let go of the
defense], what’s the feeling toward me that led you to put up this
wall between us? [Encourage her to face the feeling the defense
was covering.]
Differentiating the Corners of the Triangle
Once the patient can pay attention to her feelings, anxiety, and defense
in the present moment, can she differentiate the stimulus from her feelings,
her feelings from anxiety, and her feelings from the defense she uses?
Differentiating the Stimulus from the Feeling
Sometimes the patient cannot differentiate what someone did to her
from how she feels toward that person. In response, help her differentiate
the stimulus from her reactive feeling so she can become aware of the
feeling.
Th: What was the feeling toward him for slapping you?
Pt: I felt hurt. [Patient confuses the stimulus with the feeling the
stimulus triggered.]
Th: He hurt you. [Stimulus.] And what is your feeling toward him for
hurting you?
Pt: I felt betrayed. [Patient confuses the stimulus with the feeling the
stimulus triggered.]
Th: He did betray you. [Stimulus.] What is your feeling toward him for
doing that?
Pt: I felt abandoned. [Patient confuses the stimulus with the feeling the
stimulus triggered.]
Th: He did abandon you! That’s what he did. [Stimulus.] But the
question for us is this: what is your feeling toward him for doing
that?
Pt: I’m angry. [Patient can now distinguish the stimulus (what he did to
her) from her feeling toward him for doing that.]
Suppose I walked up to you and rubbed some sandpaper harshly on your
arm. You would not say you felt “sandpapered.” You would say you felt
angry toward me. Differentiate the stimulus from feeling so patients can
become aware of their reactive feeling.
Differentiating the Feeling from Anxiety
If we ask, “What is the feeling toward her for throwing the engagement
ring into the gutter?” the patient may reply, “I feel scared.” “I feel afraid.”
“I feel anxious.” “I feel frightened.” He fails to distinguish the feeling
toward his fiancé from the anxiety his feeling triggers. Patients who cannot
differentiate their feeling from anxiety remain paralyzed by anxiety.
Differentiate the patient’s anxiety from his feeling and then invite him to
face his feeling.
Th: What is the feeling toward her for throwing the engagement ring
into the gutter?
Pt: I feel afraid.
Th: That’s your anxiety. If we don’t cover your feeling with anxiety, can
we take a look at the feeling toward her that is making you
anxious?
Pt: I feel afraid of her.
Th: You probably were afraid of her, but right now, she’s not here. So
right now, what is the feeling toward her for throwing that ring into
the gutter?
Pt: I feel tense.
Th: Tension is your anxiety. If we put this lid of tension off to the side,
can we take a look at the feeling underneath that tension? What is
the feeling toward her for throwing the ring away?
Pt: I’m angry with her.
Anxiety signals that the rising feeling was dangerous in the past. In the
example above, the patient covered his anger with anxiety. Help the patient
push the anxiety to the side so he can face the feeling underneath and
channel it into effective action.
Differentiating the Feeling from the Defense
When we ask the patient about her feeling, she may respond with a
defense, unable to differentiate it from her feeling (Basch 1996). Notice
how the therapist helps the patient differentiate her feeling from the
defense. Otherwise, the patient’s feeling will not be accessible.
Th: What’s the feeling toward him for throwing you out of the car?
Pt: I feel worried. [Defense. Does not differentiate feeling from defense.]
Th: Your mind goes off to worrying now, and there are a lot of thoughts
now. If we put the thoughts to the side, can we take a look at the
feeling underneath?
Pt: I feel he shouldn’t have done that. [Defense. She does not
differentiate feeling from defense.]
Th: That’s your thought, but your thought is not a feeling. What’s the
feeling toward him for throwing you out of the car?
Pt: I feel stupid for being with him. [Defense. She does not differentiate
feeling from defense.]
Th: Do you notice how there’s some feeling toward your boyfriend, but
then this critical part of your mind starts to turn the feeling toward
him into criticism of you? Do you think that might be hurting you?
If you don’t turn the criticism onto you, what is the feeling toward
him?
Pt: [Sighs.] I feel confused. [Defense. She does not differentiate feeling
from defense. Since anxiety is in the striated muscles her confusion
is not a sign of cognitive/perceptual disruption.]
Th: Confused is not a feeling. If you don’t cover your feeling with
confusion, can we have an uncensored look at this feeling toward
him?
Pt: I feel empty. [Defense. She does not differentiate feeling from
defense.]
Th: Empty is not a feeling. Emptying yourself is how you deal with
your feelings. He threw you out of the car, and now you throw out
your feelings. If you don’t throw your feelings out and empty
yourself, can we have an honest look at your feelings toward him?
Pt: I feel like running away. [Defense. She does not differentiate feeling
from defense.]
Th: You can run away from your feelings, but no matter how far you
run, your feelings are still in you. Running away is not working. If
you don’t run away from these feelings, are you willing to face
them, so we can get to the bottom of what has been troubling you?
Pt: I feel irritated. [Feeling plus defense.]
Differentiating the Feeling from a Defensive Affect
Some patients use a defensive affect to cover up the underlying feeling.
Notice how the therapist assesses the patient’s responses and sees that
the patient cannot differentiate a reactive feeling from the defensive affect
that covers her feeling. The therapist helps the patient make this distinction
so she can feel her reactive feeling rather than suffer from her defensive
affects.
Th: How do you experience this anger toward him for insulting you in
front of your friends?
Pt: I want him back! I feel such a longing for him. [She does not
differentiate her anger from the defenses of longing, and reaction
formation.]
Th: Longing is not your anger. [Differentiate defense from feeling.] You
cover your anger with longing [clarify the defensive function], but
when you cover your anger with longing, you remain stuck and
confused. [Price of the defense.] If you don’t hide your anger under
this longing, can we see how you experience this anger?
Pt: But I love him! [She does not differentiate anger from her defense of
reaction formation. She may love her boyfriend, but she uses her
love to cover her anger toward him for insulting her.]
Th: I’m sure you do. But love is not anger. [Differentiate her defensive
affect from her anger.] When you cover your anger with love, that
hides the true complexity of what you really feel. [Point out the
defensive function.] Do you see what I mean?
Pt: You mean I cover my anger with positive feelings to make things
“nicey’ nice? [She begins to see the defensive function of her love.]
Th: You put up this “nicey” nice façade, but that hides your other
feelings. That façade gives false information to you and to him.
Your façade says that you love him when he insults you. [Point out
the price of this defense.] If you don’t cover up your anger with this
“nicey” nice façade [invite her to turn against the defense], how do
you experience this anger toward him for insulting you?
One might ask, “Isn’t her love real?” Of course, and so are her other
feelings. After all, he insulted her! In this case, the patient used her love (a
real fact) to cover her anger (another real fact). Another patient might cover
her grief with the defensive affect of anger. Always differentiate the
activating affect from a defensive affect.
To differentiate the feeling from a defensive affect, examine the process.
Feeling triggers anxiety, then a defense. A defensive affect does not. Why
not? The defensive affect already serves a defensive function. (See chapter
10.)
Causality
Feelings trigger anxiety, which triggers defenses, which cause the
presenting symptoms. Once patients see this causality, their suffering begins
to make sense. They see how defenses that helped in the past create
suffering in the present. As a result, patients can turn against defenses more
easily.
Defenses can prevent us from seeing causality. The father sexually
abused the patient when she was a child. The therapist asks, “What is your
feeling toward him for abusing you as a little girl?” The patient’s awareness
of her feeling will depend on how many elements of her experience she is
aware of: the stimulus, the reactive feeling, anxiety, the defense, and the
result of the defense. See figure 8.1 for the causal sequence of those
elements.
Figure 8.1. Sequence of the elements of causality
Every conflict has at least five components. When the patient cannot see
the stimulus, feeling, anxiety, and defenses, she can see only her symptoms.
As a result, she has a global, undifferentiated experience of displeasure.
Help her recognize each of these elements and their relationships (Rangell
1985) as an understandable whole within herself.
At first, the patient may see only one element, equating it with the
entirety of her being. Let us examine several examples of low selfobserving capacity so we can show what the patient does and does not see.
The patient above might say, “I am anxious.” Yet she may not be aware of
her anger or her defense of self-attack.
Or she might say, “I am an awful person.” She is not aware of her anger,
anxiety, or the function of her self-attack: to turn her anger back on herself.
If you comment on how she attacks herself, she will deny it. “I’m just being
honest about myself.” Her awareness is limited to the result of her defense
of self-attack: “I feel horrible about myself.”
Or she might say, “I am shameful.” Of the five elements listed above,
she is aware of only the result of the self-attack: her internal experience of
being “bad” and “shameful.” At that moment, she is unaware of the
memory of being abused, her rage, anxiety, or defense of self-attack. Thus,
her shame is not the entirety of her experience; it is the entirety of her
present awareness—limited by her defenses.
In each example, defenses prevent the patient from being aware of some
part of the chain of causality. As a result, she has a mistaken sense of
causality. For instance, she believes her defenses solve her problems rather
than create them. Address the defenses that restrict the patient’s awareness
of causality. If we help her to feel her rage toward the abuser, notice the
anxiety it triggers, and see her defense of self-attack, she can turn against
the defense of self-attack. As a result, she will feel rage toward the abuser
without attacking herself. She will feel rage toward him rather than identify
with his shame. The shame will return to him where it always belonged.
Defenses interfere with the patient’s awareness of her inner life: the
stimulus, feelings, anxiety, defenses, and the results—presenting problems.
The resulting incorrect causality keeps patients confused and unable to deal
with their feelings effectively.
The following examples illustrate different problems of causality.
The patient is aware of the stimulus but not her feeling. “He asked
me to touch his genitals.” When the therapist invites the feeling, the
patient responds, “I don’t feel anything.”
The patient is aware of her feeling but not the stimulus. “I’m so
angry, but I don’t know why. It just doesn’t make sense.”
The patient is unaware of the feeling triggering her anxiety. “I don’t
know why I feel anxious now.”
The patient is aware of her feeling but not her defense of self-attack.
“I’m angry with him, but, after all, I submitted to him.”
The patient is aware of her defense and the result of it but not of the
stimulus, her feeling, or anxiety. “But I am shameful. I hate myself
because I think I deserve it.”
The patient is unaware of the stimulus, feeling, or anxiety triggering
the defense. “I don’t know why I asked that guy to use me.”
The patient is unaware of the stimulus, feeling, anxiety, or defenses
causing her symptom. “I don’t know why I am so depressed.”
The patient is aware of the result of her defense and her anxiety, but
not of her defense, feeling, or the trigger to the feeling. “I feel afraid
and ashamed of myself.”
The patient is unaware of how her defenses cause her presenting
problems so she imagines other people create her problems. “Other
people have it in for me.”
The patient is unaware of how her defenses make her feel worse.
“This therapy is making me worse!”
The patient is unaware of the stimulus, feeling, anxiety, or defenses
causing her depression. “Maybe my depression is genetic.” We need
to make meaning of our lives, but without an accurate understanding
of causality, all we can do is create pseudoexplanations based on
false causality.
The patient does not see how her defenses (things she does) create
her suffering. “No matter what I do, the same things keep
happening.” Since she does not see her defenses, she believes,
“There’s nothing I can do.”
Vignette One: Causality Error
Notice how the patient does not see how a stimulus triggers her feeling.
The therapist will help the patient differentiate the stimulus from the feeling
and then help the patient see how the stimulus triggers the feeling.
Th: What are you feeling toward him?
Pt: I’m feeling left. [The patient does not describe her feeling, but what
someone did to her.]
Th: “Left” is not a feeling, but it may be that someone has left you. Is
that what you are describing?
Pt: Joe did leave me this weekend. He had promised to move in with
me, and I had rented this apartment so we could live together. Then
Sunday he broke up with me.
Th: What do you feel toward Joe for leaving you like that?
Pt: Like I said, I feel left. [She does not distinguish the stimulus from
the feeling.]
Th: Of course, he left you. So what is your feeling toward him for doing
that to you? [Differentiate the stimulus from the feeling.]
Pt: I feel angry.
Th: Of course, his leaving you [stimulus] triggers a lot of anger [feeling]
in you toward him. [Show causality: the stimulus triggers emotion
in her.]
Vignette Two: Causality Error
In this example, the patient does not see that feeling triggers anxiety, so
she is aware only of her anxiety. The therapist will help the patient see how
feeling triggers her anxiety. Then her anxiety makes sense and so does the
therapeutic task: facing her feeling, so she does not have to be anxious
instead.
Th: What do you notice feeling?
Pt: Tense. I’ve been anxious all day. I don’t know why. It doesn’t make
any sense.
Th: Did something happen today that might have made you anxious?
Pt: I don’t think so. I was calm until after class today.
Th: What happened at class?
Pt: Nothing much. The class was the usual. At the end of class I had to
speak to the professor about whether I could get an extension on
my paper. Since I lost a week in school due to the surgery, I’m a
little behind. I told him that, but he said I couldn’t get an extension.
Th: What is your feeling toward the professor for not giving you the
extension?
Pt: No feeling really. [Defense: denial.] I mean that’s his business, and
he has a right not to give one if he doesn’t want to. [Defense:
rationalization.]
Th: That’s your explanation for his behavior. If you don’t cover this
feeling with a reason, what’s the feeling toward him? [Identify the
defense and invite feeling.]
Pt: Angry, I guess. [Feeling plus the defense of hypothetical speech.]
Th: You guess? Either you are or you aren’t. [Block the defense.]
Pt: No. I’m angry with him. It would have really helped if I had
received the extension.
Th: Of course, so how do you experience this anger toward him? [Invite
the feeling.]
Pt: [Big sigh. She hunches her shoulders. Signs of anxiety in response to
her anger.] Tense.
Th: That’s your anxiety, but if you don’t turn your anger into anxiety,
how do you experience this anger toward him?”
Pt: I’m furious. I know he gave one to this other student who didn’t
deserve it!
Th: Do you notice how this anger is triggering some tension and anxiety
in your body now? [Point out causality: feeling triggers anxiety in
your body.]
Pt: Yes, I hadn’t noticed it before.
Th: Do you think this anger toward your professor may be what has
been triggering your anxiety all day long? [Make a causal link to
the presenting problem.]
Pt: That is when it started.
Th: This anger makes you anxious. It’s like this anxiety attacks you just
for feeling angry toward a professor. Would you like to face this
feeling underneath the anxiety so we can help you get to the bottom
of it?
Vignette Three: Causality Error
In this example, the patient does not see how feeling and anxiety trigger
her defenses. The therapist will help her see this sequence. Then they can
explore the patient’s feeling so she does not hurt herself by using her
defense.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for having this affair?
Pt: I think what a stupid person I was to see him. [Defense: self-attack.]
Th: Do you notice you talk about yourself instead of telling me about
your feeling toward him? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: Oh.
Th: If you don’t criticize yourself, can we see what your feeling is
toward him?
Pt: I feel sad because it was painful. [Defensive affect of sadness. She
sees the stimulus (the affair) but not her reactive feeling.]
Th: He had the affair and caused you pain. What is your feeling toward
him for causing you such pain? [Differentiate the stimulus and the
feeling and then invite the feeling.]
Pt: Anger.
Th: You feel angry with him for having the affair. So we see you felt
angry with him, but then you criticized yourself instead, turning the
anger back onto you. Do you see that? [Show the causality of anger
triggering the defense of self-attack.]
Pt: I see it now. I didn’t see it before.
Th: If you saw all this, you wouldn’t need to be here. Then we saw that
you feel angry toward him and then sadness comes in to cover your
anger. Do you see that?
Pt: But I am sad. [Does not see how sadness functions as a defense to
cover her anger.]
Th: Sure. You have many complex feelings: anger, guilt, grief, pain, and
longing. The sadness is real, but the problem is how your sadness
comes in to cover your anger. [One part of reality can be enlisted to
cover another part of reality.] That keeps you in the dark. If you are
sad, you feel it, but when you are angry, the sadness comes instead
as a substitute, and then you get depressed. [Point out the function
and result of the defense: depression.] Do you see what I mean
now?
Vignette Four: Causality Error
In this example, the patient does not see that her defenses cause her
presenting problem. As a result, she sees no reason to let go of her defenses
or to engage in the therapeutic task. The therapist must help the patient see
how her defenses create her problems so she can let go of them and engage
in the therapeutic task.
Th: Do you notice how you distance yourself here from me as soon as
we touch on your sadness?
Pt: I’m just trying to protect myself. [The patient believes the defense
protects her because she does not see how it hurts her.]
Th: But is this distancing protecting you or is it keeping you lonely?
[Help the patient see how the defense hurts her.]
Pt: [Shifts in chair with rise of anxiety.] Lonely, but then I feel safe.
[Failure to see how the defense endangers her.]
Th: Are you feeling safe? You look anxious. It seems to me that
distancing now deprives you of the support you came here to have.
Distancing from your husband has created the distant relationship
you have been complaining about. I can appreciate how distancing
in the past helped you then, but would you agree that distancing
creates the loneliness and isolation that you are suffering from right
now. [Correct her causality error: her defense does not create
safety; it creates problems.]
Pt: I see what you mean.
Empathize with her. Her defenses, adaptive in the past, are maladaptive
today.
Causality Error Due to the Inability to See the Feeling
In the following example, the patient mistakenly believes the therapist
causes her anxiety because she does not see the feeling that triggers it.
Pt: I’m afraid of you.
Psychodiagnosis: The patient is aware of her anxiety but not the
feelings that trigger it. As a result, she mistakenly thinks that you,
not her feelings, cause her anxiety.
False causality: You cause my anxiety.
True causality: My feelings toward you make me anxious.
Causality Error Due to Projection of the Superego
In the following example, the patient mistakenly believes the therapist is
cornering her because she does not see how her defenses corner her.
Pt: I’m feeling cornered.
Psychodiagnosis: The patient’s superego “corners” her, but the patient
projects the superego onto the therapist, now believing he corners
her.
Th: That’s interesting because we have been talking about how this
punitive mechanism has been cornering you by attacking you,
putting you down, and telling you to give up. If you want, the two
of us together could corner that punitive mechanism so it can no
longer corner you.
Pt: [Cries.] I never thought of that.
Incorrect causality: “You are cornering me.”
Correct causality: “I corner myself through self-attack.”
Causality: Defenses Cause Presenting Problems and Symptoms
When formulating the triangle of conflict for a patient, note all the
defenses she uses and the presenting problems they create. For instance,
suppose a patient detaches, remains vague, does not declare a problem, and
takes a passive stance. These defenses would create a failed marriage, poor
relationships with office mates, and loneliness. These defenses would also
sabotage a therapeutic alliance. Help the patient see how her defenses create
her presenting problems so she can co-create a therapeutic alliance.
Syntonicity
The final element of self-observing capacity involves syntonicity: the
inability to differentiate oneself from the defense. From the earliest days of
life, we deal with our feelings through defenses. Learned implicitly and
nonverbally, defenses become automatic habits. Therefore, we should not
be surprised when a patient does not see defenses or assumes that “that’s the
way I am.”
Syntonicity is often defined in terms of the patient not seeing his
defenses or believing that they are helpful and adaptive. These beliefs
indicate that the patient cannot observe or pay attention to his defense, or he
fails to see causality. Syntonicity, narrowly defined here, refers to the
patient’s identification with the defense. If he does not disidentify with his
defense, he continues to use it, making it impossible for him to gain deeper
access to his inner life.
Syntonicity: Restructure the Patient’s Identification with His Defenses
Although patients’ defenses are actions they do, patients often
mistakenly believe defenses are who they are. They identify with their
defenses. As a result, no internal focus is possible. First, address the
patient’s tendency to ignore his defenses so he can observe and pay
attention to them. Syntonic defenses repress anxiety and feeling; hence, the
patient is not aware of them. Since he does not see his feelings, anxiety, or
defense, he cannot differentiate the elements of conflict, nor can he see
causality.
To help the patient disidentify from his defenses, help him see that he is
not the same as his defense and that his defenses create his presenting
problems. Defenses, which he thought were his friends, are his enemies. He
has been satisfied with defenses, which create his dissatisfaction. He
believes they are not the cause of his problems but the solution, a source of
help rather than harm. The following examples illustrate the continuum
from dystonicity to syntonicity of defenses.
The Spectrum from Dystonicity to Syntonicity
The following examples illustrate the spectrum of syntonicity, ranging
from no defense to complete identification with the defense. The therapist
who recognizes this spectrum can tailor her interventions accordingly.
1. “I want to be close to people.” [No defenses.]
2. “I want to be close to people, but, for some reason, I pull back, and I
don’t like that I do that.” [The patient sees her defense and does not
like it.]
3. “I want to be close to people, but it doesn’t happen. I don’t know
why.” [The patient does not see her defenses, the ways she avoids
closeness. She feels conflict because she wants closeness.]
4. “I’m not sure I want to be close to people. I could get hurt.” [The
patient uses a defense (rationalization) but does not see it as a
defense. She believes her rationalization is helpful and protects her,
even though it prevents emotional closeness. She is identified with
her defense of distancing, but since she says, “I’m not sure,” she
still feels a slight degree of conflict.]
5. “I don’t want to be close. You do!” [She does not see her defense of
projection onto the therapist, believing it to be a rational appraisal
of him. She does not see any internal desire for closeness, nor does
she see her lack of closeness or her defense as a problem. She is
identified with her defense and disidentified with her wish for
closeness. She feels no internal emotional conflict.]
6. “I don’t want to be close. I enjoy keeping people at a distance. I like
seeing my boyfriend try to get close to me and thinking he is close
to me when he really isn’t.” [The patient does not see her defense of
denial. Her enjoyment of pushing people away reveals that her
defense is not a problem, but a source of pleasure! She is identified
with her defense.]
Differentiating the Patient from Her Defenses
Ego syntonic refers to behaviors, values, defenses, and feelings that are
acceptable to patients or consistent with their self-image (S. Freud
1923/1961b). When these patients become aware of their defenses, they
respond, “That’s just the way I am.” If you note how they detach, they
reply, “I’m a detached person.” Correct causality would be: “When faced
with emotions, I detach from them. That choice is not me. I can make many
choices, but, through habit, I choose to reveal only a tiny part of myself
emotionally.” These patients equate who they are with the act of defense (“I
detach”) or with the result of defense (“I’m an unemotional person”). They
see their defenses as part of their very being.
As a result, if you confront their defenses, they experience you as
criticizing them rather than describing the ways they handle their feelings.
These patients see no reason to pay attention to, and turn against, defenses
since “This is who I am.” Therefore, we must help patients differentiate
themselves from their defenses. First, help the patient observe and pay
attention to his defenses, their function, and causality. Then address his
identification with the defense.
Vignette One: Identification with the Defense
Notice how the therapist assesses the patient’s responses and sees how
the patient identifies with her defense. Thus, the therapist must help the
patient see that the defense is not “who she is” but how she deals with her
feelings.
Th: Do you notice how you detach from your feeling? [Point out the
defense.]
Pt: That’s the way I am. I’m detached. I’m not an emotional person.
[Identification with the defense.]
Th: Detached is not the way you are. Detaching is how you handle your
feelings. You detach from your feelings. [Differentiate who she is
from how she handles her feelings.] Do you see what I mean?
Pt: Maybe I’m not an emotional person. [Identification with the
defense.]
Th: That’s not true. You have emotions, but you detach from them.
[Differentiate her feelings from her defense.] Right now, you show
me this façade of detachment instead of the feelings underneath.
[Differentiate the uninvolved, detached relationship from the
therapeutic relationship.] Are you willing to let me see who you
really are under this façade of the unemotional woman?
The term façade differentiates the patient from her defense.
Detachment, intellectualization, withdrawal, and lack of involvement
function like masks, hiding the emotional person underneath. Help the
patient differentiate who she is from the ways she hides herself.
Vignette Two: Identification with the Defense
Notice how the therapist assesses the patient’s responses and sees that
the patient does not differentiate who he is from the choice he makes about
dealing with his feelings. The therapist uses a metaphor to help the patient
see how defenses are choices, ways of turning off of “the road to feeling.”
Th: Do you notice how you keep distancing yourself from your
emotions? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: But that’s the way I am. [Identification with the defense.]
Th: No, that’s just a habit you have. When you have a feeling, you deal
with that feeling habitually by detaching. It’s a habit.
Pt: I thought that’s all I am, a collection of habits. [Identification with
his defenses.]
Th: Oh no. Imagine if you and I went for a drive. We come to an
intersection, and you make a right-hand turn. Then we come to the
next intersection, and you make another right-hand turn. And the
same thing keeps happening until it becomes clear we’re going
around in circles, not getting anywhere. Now we wouldn’t say
that’s “who you are,” but we would say that you have a funny way
of driving your car. [Distinguish who he is from choices he makes.]
Pt: [Laughs.] That’s true.
Th: You know at an intersection you could go straight ahead, left, right,
backwards, or even just leave the car in park, but we would notice
that you have a habit of making only one choice. [Point out how
unconscious defenses limit the range of our conscious choices.]
Pt: You mean there is a me here making these choices? [Awareness of
himself and his agency as separate from his choices.]
Vignette Three: Identification with the Defense
In this example, the therapist uses another metaphor to help the patient
differentiate a defense from his essence as a person. A defense has as little
to do with a person’s being as a leech has to do with the leg it is sucking on.
Th: Do you see how you turn this anger on yourself and start to criticize
yourself ?
Pt: I do that a lot.
Th: You notice that pattern here as a way to deal with your anger. [Show
causality: anger, anxiety, and the defense of self-attack.]
Pt: I’m not sure it’s that. That’s just the way I am. [Identification with
the defense.]
Th: That’s not the way you are. It’s sort of like, if you’re in a jungle and
you see a large tree, but it’s all covered with vines. In fact, the vines
are so large after so many years that you can barely even see the
tree underneath. See, this healthy tree is you, but we have to pull off
these vines of self-attack that have covered you up so we can see
who you really are underneath all that. Do you see what I mean?
[Introduce a visual metaphor to help the patient distinguish himself
from his defenses.]
This example shows how patients can suffer from a problem in
representation. We ask patients to see feelings, anxiety, and defenses that
are invisible. Obviously, patients cannot see invisible things of which they
are unaware. For that reason, provide visual metaphors to help patients form
a picture of their inner life. For instance, if a patient has trouble
understanding how one feeling can cover another, I will take two books
from my bookshelf and show how one book (defensive affect) can make
another book (the feeling) invisible when placed on top.
We do not ask if this patient can see a defense, strictly speaking. We ask
if she can represent this sequence of events: feeling, anxiety, and defense.
Usually, patients cannot. Provide visual metaphors so the patient can see
how anxiety (like a policeman) comes in to punish her, or how self-attack
(like a vine on a tree) strangles her. Visual metaphors help the patient
picture invisible processes.
Sometimes therapists mistakenly refer to defensive behaviors as parts of
the self. Defenses or identifications are no more “parts of the self ” than a
mask is a part of the face. Take the patient who covers her anger with
sadness. We would not say her defense is a “part” of her. We would say her
defense is how she hides parts of herself.
Failure to Differentiate the Patient from His Defenses Leads to
Premature Challenge of Defenses
When the patient does not see his defense, does not see its price, or does
not see that he is not the same as his defense, he is not differentiated from
his defense. If you confront his defense, he will think you are attacking him
as a person, rather than describing a way he handles his feelings. Therefore,
never challenge or confront a defense until he can see his defense, its
function, and the causality and can differentiate himself from the defense.
Otherwise, your premature confrontation of the defense will cause a
misalliance.
First, help the patient observe and pay attention to his defenses. Then
help him differentiate his feelings from anxiety and from his defenses. Then
help him see causality. Then help him disidentify with his defenses. These
steps establish the therapeutic alliance. Now we can challenge or confront
those defenses because the patient knows you are helping, not attacking
him.
Differentiate the Depressed Patient from Her Defenses
Let’s examine the phase of defense identification with depressed
patients who identify with their defenses.
Vignette: Differentiating the Patient from Her Defenses
Notice how the therapist helps the depressed patient differentiate herself
from her defense of cutting. Since the defense is so syntonic, we must take
more time to help the patient see the defense and causality.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for throwing you out of the car?
Pt: I cut myself.
Psychodiagnosis: The patient equates her feeling of anger toward the
boyfriend with her defense of cutting herself. If you explore her
anger or confront her self-attack, she may punish and cut herself
after the session. First, help her see and turn against this defense
before exploring her anger deeply.
Th: Cutting yourself is not a feeling. Cutting is a way to deal with
feelings. [Differentiate the feeling from her defense of self-attack.]
There is some feeling toward him, but there’s a critical system in
your mind [differentiate her from this automatic defense] that takes
this feeling and turns it on you [describe the defense mechanism].
Do you see that? Do you think that critical system might be hurting
you? [Differentiate her from the defense and help her turn against
it.] Could that critical system in your mind be making you
depressed? [Point out causality to turn the patient against the
defense.] Would you like to see what the feeling is toward him
that’s getting covered by this critical system in your mind? [Invite
her to face her feeling again.]
Use abstract language like a “critical system in your mind” to help
differentiate her from the defense, to observe self-criticism rather than
engage in it. If we noted how she hurts herself, she would begin to hate
herself again. “You’re so right, doctor. This is just another sign that I am
terrible. Look at the way I hurt myself!” Instead, refer to a “critical
mechanism in her mind,” a “habit,” or a “thought pattern” to help her see
these defenses while differentiating from them. Only when she sees and is
fully differentiated from these defenses (no longer equating herself with
self-attack), can we begin to talk about how she hurts herself.
Pt: That was so stupid of me.
Th: This is a critical mechanism in your mind. You have a feeling, and
then this critical mechanism turns that feeling into criticism aimed
back onto you. Do you think that critical mechanism is hurting
you?
Differentiate the patient from an automatic habit. If we said she is
criticizing herself, she might punish herself immediately for having done so.
First, describe the defense as a mechanism that happens without her
conscious will. Some wonder if this may be a useful way to talk to the
patient but an inaccurate description. I would suggest it is accurate.
Procedural memory operates outside the patient’s awareness, leading to
habitual modes of behavior such as bicycle riding and self-attack.
Differentiate unconscious habits from her conscious will. She can
consciously choose not to use a defense only when she sees it.
Pt: I really messed that up.
• Th: So there’s this critical part of your mind.
• Th: So there’s this habit.
• Th: Is this a kind or a cruel way to treat yourself ?
Pt: I just feel really anxious.
• Th: Do you notice how it’s like a policeman comes in and Tasers
you with anxiety? As if it’s against the law for you to have this
emotion of anger?
• Th: Do you see how this anxiety comes in to punish and attack
you just for having a feeling? You must be upset with what this
anxiety is doing to you, how it is trying to hold you back from
what you want.
• Th: Do you see how it’s like a perpetrator comes in the room and
strangles you with anxiety just because you have this feeling?
• Th: Do you see how that mechanism comes in to attack and
sabotage you right now?
Help the patient differentiate herself from the choices she makes,
between the driver of the car and the roads she takes. By answering these
questions, she experiences her agency. She sees the choices she could make
and their consequences. Although these questions might seem rhetorical, in
fact, they help the patient experience her agency. Her defenses are not her;
they are choices made by her. Through awareness of choice, she becomes
aware of herself as an agent, separate from her defenses.
Remind the Patient of Causality
Help patients see the effects their defenses have.
What impact does this self-punishment have on you?
Is this self-punishment your goal, or is it what you want us to
overcome?
Can you help me see how this self-punishment is benefiting you?
Is this self-punishment giving you the results you want?
Do you think this mechanism might be making you depressed?
Do you think this way of treating yourself might be hurting you?
When you say that, does it make you feel better or worse?
Is this mechanism helping you get to the bottom of your difficulties,
or is it getting in your way?
When you say this to yourself, is that you or the internal punitive
mechanism?
Notice how you are tempted to give up on yourself? It sounds like
you already tried that. What were the results?
You see how you punish yourself now. Are we here to continue your
father’s dirty work, or are we here to make a different choice?
[Patient had an abusive father.]
When the Patient Says, “I Don’t Know”
This seemingly simple phrase, “I don’t know,” can mean many things,
each of which requires a different response from the therapist. We will
review an incomplete list of the meanings of this phrase to illustrate the
psychodiagnosis of self-observing capacity.
Example One
Th: What’s the feeling toward him for throwing you out of the car?
Pt: I don’t know. [The patient is not aware of her anger because she
uses so many defenses. When she says she doesn’t know, she is
stating a fact.]
Th: It’s hard for you to know what you feel. No wonder you feel stuck:
without knowing what you feel, you don’t know for sure what you
want in this relationship.
Example Two
Th: What’s the feeling toward your lover for having stolen money from
you?
Pt: I don’t know. [The patient does not want to admit her anger because
she would have to face the need to leave him.]
Th: I can appreciate that. When you do know what you feel, you will
face some difficult choices.
Pt: That is true.
Example Three
Th: What’s the feeling toward me?
Pt: I don’t know. I feel fine with you. [The patient tries to avoid conflict
with the therapist.]
Th: I sense some reluctance here as if you are worried your feelings
here could make things not fine.
Example Four
Th: Notice how you detach here with me?
Pt: Yes.
Th: What can we do about that?
Pt: I don’t know. [Said with a smirk. The patient defies the therapist.]
Th: Well, the good news is, you don’t have to do anything about it. You
can detach as much as you think would be helpful to you.
[Deactivate the defiance.] It’s just that as long as you detach, we
won’t be able to get to the bottom of your difficulties.
Example Five
Th: Notice how you detach here with me?
Pt: Yes.
Th: What can we do about that?
Pt: I don’t know. [Said with a puzzled look. The patient does not know
what the healthy alternative is to detaching.]
Th: Well, if detaching is the unhealthy alternative, what would be the
healthy alternative?
Example Six
Th: What is the feeling toward him for betraying you?
Pt: [Patient goes limp.] I don’t know. [The patient experiences
cognitive/perceptual disruption and goes blank.]
Th: Did your mind just go blank there?
Pt: Yes.
Th: That’s a sign of anxiety.
When the patient says she does not know the answer to your question,
do not assume she does. Assess self-observing capacity carefully based on
the total context. To avoid getting this response, avoid asking questions that
will generate it (Mitchell 2007; H. S. Sullivan 1953a). If you ask questions
far beyond her self-observing capacity, “I don’t know” will be the result.
Rather than ask for something she does not know, find out what defenses
prevent her from knowing. Then help her see and let go of those defenses.
SUMMARY
We have outlined the basic self-observing capacities and common
psychodiagnostic problems. The same principle for assessing and building
capacity applies to anxiety, defenses, and transference resistance. Each time
the patient presents with a defense, assess the patient’s self-observing
capacity. Then build the patient’s self-observing capacity to reduce the
syntonicity of the defense. Self-observing capacities must be mobilized in a
certain order: observe feeling, anxiety, and defense; pay attention to feeling,
anxiety, and defense; see causality; and differentiate the patient as a person
from the defenses he uses.
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Ten Have de Labije, J. (2001). Red and green traffic lights on Davanloo’s
road to the unconscious. In The Collected Writings of Josette ten Have
de Labije (pp. 97–110). Del Mar, CA: Unlocking Press.
W
CHAPTER NINE
Regressive Defenses
hen working with patients in the fragile spectrum, we restructure
the pathway of anxiety discharge, build self-observing capacity,
and restructure regressive defenses. Regressive defenses make
anxiety more dysregulated and reality testing more impaired, leading to
severe regressions. Thus, it is essential to identify and restructure regressive
defenses (Land 1991).
The term regression refers to regression from conscious to unconscious
processes; temporal regression from mature to earlier forms of functioning;
and formal regression to modes of expression that are less complex,
structured, and differentiated (S. Freud 1914/1957b). Regressive defenses
are examples of formal regression. Rather than experience their feelings
internally, patients can use regressive defenses to get rid of their feelings
through acting out, verbal discharge, splitting, and projection. They
“relocate” parts of themselves in others and then lose the ability to
differentiate reality from a fantasy (e.g., a projection).
Patient groups have specific defenses that require restructuring: fragile
patients (splitting and projection); depressed patients (weepiness, turning
rage on the self, and character defenses); somatizing patients (identifying
with the object of one’s rage); and impulsive patients (cursing, discharge,
projection, and acting out).
Principle: To restructure a regressive defense, (1) identify the regressive
defense, (2) clarify its price and function, (3) invite the
patient to let go of it, and (4) integrate the previously split-off
feelings.
ACTING OUT: PUNCHING WALLS OR THROWING
OBJECTS
Patients who are unable to tolerate feelings internally, act out their
feelings externally. Unable to bear a rise of feelings, they vent, yell, or hit
things to get rid of the internal experience of feeling. Rather than feel rage
toward a loved one, a man may punch the wall. He releases the rage while
punishing himself with broken knuckles. Acting out always wards off the
internal experience of feeling or provokes punishment for having it.
Vignette One: Making the Defense Dystonic
In the following example, the patient does not see the price of his
defense of acting out. Thus, he is not yet motivated to let go of the defense.
Th: Rather than experience the rage toward Jane, you punched the wall
instead. [Identify the defense.]
Pt: Right.
Th: But then who took the hit? Who got hurt? [Point out the price.]
Pt: Me.
Th: See how destructive this mechanism is? You felt the rage toward
Jane, but then you were the one who got hurt! By turning the rage
on the wall, you avoided facing your feelings toward her and
punished yourself instead. Would you like to face this rage honestly
in here so we can help you overcome this pattern of self-abuse?
Encourage the patient to feel his feelings internally as powerfully as
possible so he can channel them into adaptive self-assertion rather than
maladaptive self-destruction.
Vignette Two: Differentiating Feeling from the Defense of
Acting Out
In the following example, the patient does not see the difference
between experiencing a feeling internally within his body and acting it out
externally. That is, he does not differentiate between his feeling and his
defense, which helps him avoid the internal experience of his feeling.
Th: How do you experience this rage at Jane?
Pt: I slugged her.
Psychodiagnosis: The patient equates his feeling of anger with the
defense of acting out.
Th: But slugging her is not your rage. Slugging is how you try to get rid
of your rage, to keep from feeling it inside you [differentiate the
defense from feeling], but this is very destructive. By hitting Jane,
you kill off the love she could feel for you. [The price of the
defense.] When you act out your rage, you push her away, and
invite her to leave you. Why do that to yourself? [Address the selfpunishment to help him turn against it.]
ACTING OUT IN RESPONSE TO A PROJECTION
A recovering drug addict abandoned his son when he was high on
drugs. Rather than experience his guilt, however, he projected his superego
onto everyone in his rehabilitation facility. “Who are you looking at?” he
would ask. He projected his cruel superego onto others, imagining that they
judged him. He became furious at these “judges,” and then acted out toward
them, trying to provoke them to punish him. Unfortunately, he failed to
differentiate them from his projections.
Acting out is frequently accompanied by cognitive/perceptual
disruption. The hippocampus, which integrates short-term memory, shuts
down when anxiety is too high. That may be why impulsive patients often
do not remember what happened when they act out.
CONTEMPT AND SARCASM
Contempt and sarcasm, regressive defenses against emotional closeness,
prevent the establishment of a therapeutic alliance. Some patients mistake
contempt and sarcasm for honesty. However, contempt and sarcasm devalue
the other person rather than offer a complex, nuanced view. In fact,
contempt is always a dishonest, partial picture of other people. And sarcasm
offers a relationship based on disrespect, something that could never be the
basis for a therapeutic alliance.
In the following example, the patient does not see the price of his
defense, contempt. Notice the amount of time a therapist may need to take
to help the patient see the price of his defense.
Pt: That was a stupid comment. I can’t believe you therapists try to pull
that kind of crap. Do you really expect me to take you seriously?
Th: Do you notice you referred to what I said as stupid?
Pt: Yes.
Th: Do you notice you also seem to regard it as normal not to take me
seriously? [Point out facts.]
Pt: Of course.
Th: Do you notice this wall of contempt you are putting up here with
me? [Ask the patient if he sees this defense.]
Pt: Do you have a problem with that? [The patient implicitly reveals he
sees it but asks a provocative question. Do not answer it or take the
bait.]
Th: There’s this wall of contempt you are putting up here between you
and me. You put up a wall by calling what I say crap. And you put
up a wall by calling what I say stupid. This is very important for us
to look at because as long as there is this wall of contempt here
between you and me, there will be no way for this therapy to help
you. So the first thing we need to ask is, “What do you want to do
about this wall of contempt?” [Point out the defense and its price.
Mobilize his will to turn against the defense.]
Pt: What? Do you have a problem with my honesty? [Psychodiagnosis:
the patient cannot differentiate honest communication of his
feelings from the defense of contempt. He invites a battle of wills,
something the therapist must avoid.]
Th: We are not talking about honesty. We are talking about contempt.
Right now, you are putting up this wall of contempt. And the
question we have to ask is: what do you want to do about this wall?
As long as there is this wall of contempt here, this relationship will
be doomed to fail.
Pt: Maybe I don’t care if this relationship fails.
Th: That may be. Perhaps you want this relationship to fail, and the
good news is, if that’s what you want, that’s what you’ll have. For
as long as you maintain this wall of contempt, I will remain another
useless person in your life, and you can make this into another
useless, dead therapy in the graveyard of failed therapies. Your
suffering can continue, but, as you say, that may be acceptable to
you.
Pt: [Tears in his eyes.] It’s not that bad. [Partial recognition of his pain
and suffering, accompanied by the defense of minimization.]
Th: And you may not want it to be any better. Neither I nor anyone else
can help you as long as you maintain this wall of contempt. This
process will be doomed to failure like all your relationships. Then I
can say, “I tried to help Jim, but he didn’t want it.” And we would
have to say goodbye to each other. I can afford to fail. I can’t help
everyone, but then who remains the lonely man? Who continues to
suffer? If you want only to maintain this wall of contempt,
obviously there would be no reason for us to meet.
Pt: [Cries.]
Meet his hate with strength (Winnicott 1965). Tolerating contempt cocreates a sadomasochistic relationship, not a therapeutic one. You are his
therapist, not his toilet (H. Eist, personal communication). Standing firm
will give him the faith that you can help him turn against this destructive
defense. To be effective, speak from a position of calm rather than anger.
Otherwise, you will be caught up in the patient’s defense, creating a battle
of wills. Repeat the above interventions until the patient feels grief over the
ways contempt destroys his relationships. Expressing contempt or sarcasm
is not free association, but a sadistic attack. Block this defense, which
sabotages therapy.
DEFIANCE
Unconscious defiance can take the form of a sarcastic tone of voice, a
refusal to explore key issues and feelings, dismissive laughter,
stubbornness, a passive, provocative stance, arrogance, or noninvolvement.
The defiance may not be overt but enacted through behaviors. Why?
Most defiant patients were traumatized. Imagine a child being beaten.
He gets an even worse beating if he defends himself. The experience of his
will triggers anxiety, so inhibiting his will or using his counterwill (Rank
1936) becomes habitual and automatic over time. He develops character
traits that allow him to express his rage through defiant behaviors while
simultaneously triggering punishment from others.
Every patient begins therapy with the wish to share his feelings, and his
fear of doing so. Some people bear this conflict internally, acknowledging
both their wish and defense. Fragile patients sometimes cannot do this.
They identify themselves with the defense: “I don’t want to share.” They
project the wish to share onto the therapist: “You want me to share.” Then
they oppose the therapist’s “will”: “It is not my wish to reveal myself. I
must defy your ‘wish’ that I reveal myself.”
The patient is not defying you. He defies the projections he places on
you. For instance, he wants to face his feelings. But he forgets his desires
and projects them onto you. Now that you “personify” his desire, he defies
or submits to “your” will. There appears to be a conflict between a pushy
therapist and a resistant patient. In fact, the conflict is between his wish to
reveal and his resistance to doing so.
Confronting defiance makes it stronger. If you mistakenly ask about his
feeling toward you, he will become angry at the projection on you: “Trying
to explore feelings shows that you want to explore and invade me. So I am
angry at you.” His anger toward this projection will only deepen the
misalliance.
Defiance and submission are two sides of the same coin: “I project my
will onto you. So I can defy or submit to ‘your’ will.” Either way, he relates
to a projection. To establish a therapeutic alliance, reduce defiance (Korff
1998) by deactivating the projection of will upon which defiance is based.
Remind the patient of his desire. Once he experiences his will internally, he
will not have to defy it “in” his therapist.
Mobilizing Will and Deactivating Defiance: Interventions
Since the patient defies the will he has projected upon the therapist, the
therapist must deactivate the projection of will for the defiance to drop. To
deactivate the projection of will, the therapist must mobilize the patient’s
awareness of his own will. The more the patient owns his will, the less he
projects it upon the therapist.
Th: You seem withdrawn right now. Do you notice that? [Identify the
defense.]
Pt: You seem to think this is a big problem [defense: projection], but
I’m not so sure it’s worth going into. [Defense: defiance.]
Th: Only you can know for sure whether this is a problem for you.
[Deactivate the projection: only the patient, not the therapist, can
determine if something is a problem.]
Pt: You seem to think I should do something about it. [Implicit
message: “I don’t think so.” Projection.]
Th: But this is your life, your suffering, and it can be your happiness.
Whether you do something about this is up to you. Perhaps you are
satisfied with how things are. [Deactivate the projection. He
believed I was not satisfied. The question is whether he is satisfied
with the results of his defenses.]
Pt: I’m not sure I want to do anything about it at this time. [Defense:
defiance.]
Th: Okay. [Deactivate the projection that I will force him.]
Pt: I feel you are trying to push me into doing this. [Defense:
projection.]
Th: I can’t. If you don’t want to explore this issue, you don’t have to.
[Deactivate the defiance.] You have every right not to explore these
issues. If this is not something you want to do, I have no right to
insist that you do so. [Deactivate projection.] But if that’s the case,
why are you here? [Point out the contradiction: you seek, yet refuse
to do therapy. Why oppose yourself ?]
Pt: I’m telling you: I’m not so sure that this is really a problem.
Th: That may be. [Avoid a battle of wills.]
Pt: My wife thinks it is a problem. [Defense: projection.]
Th: Who’s the one who came here? [Deactivate projection.]
Pt: I did.
Th: And did you come of your own free will?
Pt: My wife said I should. [Defense: projection.]
Th: But did you come of your own free will? [Deactivate projection.]
Pt: Yes, but that doesn’t mean I want to get better. [Defense: defiance.]
Th: That’s right. You may not want to get better. [Side with the
resistance.]
Pt: You can’t tell me I should. [Defense: defiance.]
Th: I’m glad we’re in agreement. Only you can tell yourself whether
you should get better. And let’s face it, you have been living this
life of a lonely, depressed man with a series of failed relationships
for fifty-three years [reflect reality], and it has been working up
until now. [Mirror his denial.] Why do anything different? If it’s
been working, why change? [Reflect reality and his denial, and
then side with the resistance. This deactivates his projection
further.]
Pt: [Tears in his eyes.] I tell you: it is working! [Breakthrough of the
feeling as the resistance breaks down. A last attempt at denial tries
to prevent a breakthrough to the feeling.]
Th: If this is not something you want to do, you don’t have to.
[Deactivate defiance.] Like you say, your life is working. [Reflect
his denial.] If this is working for you, obviously, you should keep
doing what works. [Mirror the resistance.] You know as well as I
do that therapy is not necessary for you; it’s completely optional.
[Deactivate defiance.] Why do something you don’t want to do?
[Undo the projection so the conflict is between the patient and his
defenses.] Why should we pretend to do something, when you
know you don’t want to do it? If this is not something you want to
do, you and I can shake hands and say our goodbyes, and you will
go forth with my blessing. [Deactivate the defiance.]
Pt: [He breaks down in tears and describes how devastated he was
when his wife left him.]
Deactivate Projection by Mirroring the Patient’s Resistance
When the patient projects his will onto you, he is identified with his
resistance, expecting you to argue with his position. When you mirror his
resistance, he does not get the argument he expects (your resistance to him).
Without that conflict between you and him, he cannot have the
interpersonal conflict (the defense). As a result, he experiences an
intrapsychic conflict instead, and his feelings will rise, and his defiance will
decrease. The following examples show how to mirror the resistance to
deactivate the projection of the patient’s will upon the therapist.
“I don’t know if there is something you want to explore. Perhaps
there isn’t.”
“If you want to continue this way, you certainly can. After all, it is
your life.”
“You have been carrying this depression for forty years. Why change
now?”
“If this is working for you, good for you.”
“You have every right not to look at this, but then we have to ask,
‘Why are you here?’”
“Your suffering is yours, and happiness can be yours. It’s really up to
you.”
“If this is not something you want to do, we won’t. I have no right to
explore any aspect of your inner life, but then I won’t be able to help
you.”
Deactivate Projection by Mirroring the Patient’s Denial
When the patient denies having a problem, he expects you to point out
the reality he denies. Then your interpersonal conflict serves as a defense to
ward off his feelings. Instead, mirror his denial. Then conflict is not
between you and him, but between him and his defense. This leads to a rise
of feelings and a drop in his denial. The following examples show how to
mirror the patient’s denial to deactivate the projection of his healthy
awareness upon the therapist.
“This may not be a problem for you.”
“You may be getting the results you want.”
“Your marriage, life, and work may be satisfying for you. Only you
can know for sure.”
“There is no need to rush. You can wait as long as you think it would
be helpful.”
“You may be comfortable with your symptoms as they are.”
Principle: Make sure the patient has a problem and he wants your help.
Always emphasize his free will and his right to decide
whether to do therapy. Once you deactivate his defiance,
continue to mobilize his will. Remind him that our task is to
work together to achieve his goals. Without his will, we
cannot go forward.
Use noninterpretive interventions to deactivate projections.
Interpretation fails because it reinforces his projection: “Aha. You say this
because you want to control me.” Interpretation unwittingly strengthens his
view of you as an invader whom he must defy.
We have focused on defiance resulting from the projection of the
patient’s will. Defiance can also result from projection of the superego. The
patient imagines you secretly criticize him; then he either defies or submits
to your imagined criticisms. In this case, deactivate the projection of the
superego.
DISCHARGE: RAPID SPEECH
Rapid speech prevents the patient from paying attention to her anxiety
and feelings. Her pressured speech also prevents genuine dialogue. Block
this defense immediately and then help her observe, pay attention to, and
regulate her anxiety. By listening to her rapid speech, you co-create a
dismissive relationship wherein both of you ignore her feelings and anxiety.
Th: [Speak very slowly to slow the patient down.] Do you notice you are
talking rapidly now? That’s often a sign that you are talking over
feelings and anxiety. I’m going to invite you to slow down right
now so we can see what is going on underneath these words.
Without saying anything for a moment, what do you notice feeling
inside right now? [Mobilize her attention to, and regulate, her
anxiety.]
As you speak slowly to block her defense of rapid speech, feeling and
anxiety will rise.
Pt: I’m feeling really anxious, because I’ve got to tell you— [Interrupt
her defenses of rumination and rapid speech.]
Th: Let’s slow down and notice how you experience this anxiety inside.
How do you experience this anxiety in your body right now? [Slow
the patient down, direct her attention to her feelings and anxiety,
and block her defense of rapid speech. The longer she races, the
more dysregulated she will become in the session.]
Pt: Just really tense all over [now the defense enters], but see I’ve got
all this stuff I need to get out.
Th: And I want to hear it all. I notice you are tense head to toe. Do you
notice that? [Draw attention back to her anxiety.]
Continue to slow the patient down and draw her attention to her anxiety.
DISCHARGE: LOUD SPEECH AND YELLING
Patients talk loudly in the session (assuming they do not have a hearing
impairment) to get rid of the internal experience of their feeling.
Psychodiagnosis: Inability to observe or pay attention to feelings,
anxiety, or defenses. The patient may be projecting the superego
onto you. Thus, he tries to yell over your imagined criticisms.
Vignette One: Blocking a Regressive Defense
In the following example, the patient does not see his regressive defense
of loud speech. Notice how the therapist helps the patient see and let go of
the defense so he can begin to face his underlying feelings.
Th: I don’t know if you noticed, but you are talking quite loudly. That’s
usually a way to get rid of some feeling, but any feeling that you
blow out of your mouth will be unavailable for our therapy. I’m
going to ask you to talk quietly and slowly right now, so you can
notice what you are feeling inside your body. What are you feeling
inside, if you don’t drown it out with all this loudness?
Monitor the patient closely when you block a regressive defense. In the
next second the feeling rises, anxiety rises, and a regressive defense
appears. After you block the defense, intervene as soon as anxiety rises and
before the next defense. This may take only a second. Rapidly draw her
attention to her feeling and anxiety so she can bear them without going to
defense. The longer she bears this rise of the feeling, the more you build her
capacity.
Vignette Two: Making Discharge Dystonic
A young man with a history of failed relationships has entered therapy
following the loss of his most recent girlfriend. He repeatedly feels rage in
relationships and sabotages them. He has just described an example where
his girlfriend made him angry.
Th: She made you angry, you say.
Pt: Yes, we were at a concert, and I was talking to this other woman.
My girlfriend was drunk and started yelling at me for talking to this
other girl. So I started yelling at her. [Defense of discharge.]
Th: She yelled at you [stimulus]. Naturally, you felt angry toward her
[feeling]. So how did you handle your anger?
Pt: I yelled back at her. She hit me, so when we got home I hit her back.
[Defense: discharge.] Then she decided to leave.
Th: You felt angry with her, but rather than assert yourself and set a
limit, you yelled at her instead. [Differentiate the feeling of anger
from the defense of discharge.]
Pt: Are you saying I shouldn’t have yelled at her? [Defense: projection
of his conscience.]
Th: I’m not telling you to do anything. [Block projection.] I’m just
saying that rather than feel your anger inside, you yelled at her
instead. You blew the anger out of your mouth, rather than feel it
inside and channel it adaptively by setting a clear limit with her. Do
you see what I mean?
Pt: But the yelling is my anger! [He cannot differentiate his feeling from
his defense.]
Th: Not at all! Rather than feel your anger and channel it in a healthy
way with her, you yelled. By yelling at her, you killed off the love
she could feel toward you. By hitting her, you invited her to punish
and reject you for being angry. I’m not saying you wanted her to
reject you. I’m just saying that’s the effect. When you yell at and hit
a girlfriend, you invite her to punish and reject you. Do you see
what I mean?
Pt: But she deserved it. [In the blindness of his rage and defense, he
does not see causality: his defense causes his presenting problem.]
Th: But then who gets rejected? Who loses another relationship? Who
gets depressed again?
Pt: I do.
Th: When you handle your anger by yelling and hitting, you end up
lonely. Do you think these mechanisms of yelling and hitting might
be hurting you?
Pt: I see what you mean.
Th: Yelling at her and hitting her destroyed the relationship. This may
seem like a surprise, but I don’t think you have an anger problem.
Anyone will feel anger if a girlfriend yells at them. The problem is
how you deal with your anger. Yelling and hitting invite her to
punish you for being angry. Do you see what I mean? [Differentiate
the feeling of anger from the defense by reminding him of the
price.]
Pt: What am I supposed to do? Just stuff it inside? [Defense: projection
onto the therapist.]
Th: That’s what you are already doing. You stuff the rage inside until it
gets too high, and then you explode with your girlfriend, but each
time you explode, another relationship blows up, leaving this series
of wrecked relationships behind you. Do you see what I mean?
[Point out how denial of feelings leads to discharge, destroying his
relationships.]
Pt: So what am I supposed to do? [He invites the therapist to tell him
what to do so that he, the patient, can oppose and defy the
therapist.]
Th: The good news is, you don’t have to do anything. [Deactivate
defiance.] If you want, we can face this rage as deeply as possible
and see if we can get to the bottom of what is driving this selfpunishment so we can bring your suffering to an end. [The
therapeutic task.] Or, if you want, you can stuff your anger,
explode, and continue this path of destroyed relationships [the
antitherapeutic task], but the choice is yours.
Pt: Maybe I should stop this therapy and just avoid women for the rest
of my life. [The patient invites the therapist to argue for his healthy
longings. This way he could avoid an inner conflict between his
longings and his resistance.]
Th: That’s always an option. There is no law that says you have to be in
therapy. [Deactivate defiance.] If avoiding women and
relationships, remaining a lonely man to the end of your days, is the
healthiest option for you, obviously that is what you should do.
[Mirror the resistance.]
Pt: Are you making fun of me? [He begins to realize how cruel his
resistance is, but rather than tolerate his internal conflict, he
projects onto the therapist.]
Th: How can I be making fun of you when I am only repeating what
you have said? You want to avoid women for the rest of your life
and remain a lonely man. I assume you are not making fun of
yourself. Right? [Deactivate the projection.]
Pt: Right.
Th: You have a right to avoid women and remain a lonely man. Would
you agree? [Mirror his resistance to deactivate the projection.]
Pt: I know I have that right, but that’s not really what I want to do.
[Turns against the resistance.] I have to find some way to deal with
these feelings so I don’t keep being rejected.
DISCHARGE: CURSING
Patients who impulsively act out their rage frequently curse to get rid of
rather than experience any rise in feeling. Block this defense to access the
avoided feeling and build self-observing capacity. Cursing prevents the
development of affect tolerance.
Intervention
The following intervention shows how to draw the patient’s attention to
his cursing. Notice how the therapist does not judge the patient. He simply
draws the patient’s attention to the defense’s function: making feelings
unavailable for the therapy.
Th: Do you notice you are using some curse words? It doesn’t bother
me personally. It’s just that cursing makes some feelings
unavailable for our work. Would you be willing to refrain from
cursing here, so I can help you with all your feelings? Does that
make sense to you?
DISCHARGE: TALKING OVER THE THERAPIST
Patients with low self-observing capacity impulsively talk over others as
soon as they become anxious, preventing intimate relationships. They can
talk over you as a way to talk over their feelings and anxiety. However, they
may also talk over you because they fear what you might say (projection of
the superego). If anxiety regulation does not work, assess whether the
patient is projecting a judge onto you, and then deactivate that projection.
(See projection section in this chapter, pp. 320–323, and chapter 11.)
Intervention
In the following example, the patient talked over the therapist as soon as
he started to speak. Clearly, this would prevent the patient from hearing
what the therapist said. But it also signals that the patient’s anxiety is too
high. Notice how the therapist brings the defense to the patient’s attention
without any sense of criticism.
Th: Do you notice you talked over me? It’s good you see that. That’s
going to be a problem. Talking over me will prevent us from
forming the healing relationship you need here to get better. Does
that make sense? Would you be willing to listen until I finish
speaking, so you can get the help you came here to receive?
If the patient says yes, her wish to open up will trigger a defense in the
next second, unless you mobilize her attention to her feeling right away.
Ask, “What do you notice feeling right now when you say that?” Once she
sees her feeling or anxiety, show her causality: “Some anxiety comes up as
soon as you say you want to collaborate with me. Do you see that?”
If this intervention does not work, the patient may be talking over you to
prevent you from criticizing her. In other words, she is projecting the
superego onto you. If so, explore how the patient is thinking about and
perceiving you to deactivate this projection. (See the section on projection
in this chapter, pp. 320–323, and chapter 11.)
DISSOCIATION
Dissociation is a regressive defense that creates the symptom of
“multiple selves.” Many therapies focus on the “integration of selves.” This
strategy merely “integrates” the products of a defense, not the person who
uses it (Frederickson 2000, 2003). Integrate the warded-off feelings, not the
results of defense.
Dissociation is a sign of cognitive/perceptual disruption, a brain
malfunctioning due to excessive anxiety. As soon as dissociation occurs,
stop exploring feeling and start regulating anxiety until the patient’s
cognitive/perceptual disruption and dissociation stop. If the patient has
access to striated muscle tension, the so-called dissociation is a tactical
defense of detaching. Anxiety in the striated muscles involves not only
tension but also sighing respiration and clenching of the hands. However, a
patient who is tense throughout his body, without sighing respiration, may
have a freeze response associated with dissociation.
Vignette: Dissociation
Notice in the following example how the therapist begins to regulate the
patient’s anxiety as soon as he dissociates. The first concern of the therapist
should be anxiety regulation before addressing the defense of dissociation
itself.
Th: What’s the feeling toward your father for beating you?
Pt: I just left.
Th: What do you mean?
Pt: It’s like I went up on the ceiling. [The patient’s face is slack, his eyes
are blank, and his body is limp—no striated tension.]
Th: How is your thinking now?
Pt: It’s a little fuzzy. I’m trying really hard to concentrate, but it’s not
working. [Cognitive/perceptual disruption.]
Th: Is there any ringing in your ears, or is your vision blurry? [Assess
the discharge pattern of his anxiety.]
Pt: No ringing in my ears, but my vision is blurry. It’s getting better
now. [Anxiety drops.]
Th: As we step back to observe: your thinking was fuzzy, your vision
got blurry, and you were having some trouble thinking. [Encourage
the patient to observe and label the symptoms to bring down his
anxiety.] How is your thinking now? [Assess the anxiety.]
Pt: It’s fine now, and the vision is fine. [Anxiety now goes into striated
muscles, and cognitive/perceptual disruption is gone.]
Th: There was some feeling toward your father. This feeling triggered
anxiety. Then your mind conked out. [Outline the triangle of
conflict.] Do you see that?
Pt: Yeah, I don’t know why it did that.
Th: What was the feeling toward your father that made you so anxious?
[Inviting the feeling.]
Pt: I must have been angry.
Anxiety may shift back into cognitive/perceptual disruption when you
explore the feeling. If so, stop exploring the feeling, regulate the anxiety,
and outline the triangle of conflict until the patient’s anxiety returns to the
striated muscles. Then encourage the patient to face his feelings at a higher
level in a different example. As his affect tolerance rises,
cognitive/perceptual disruption and dissociation will disappear.
EXTERNALIZATION
Externalization is a defense by which the patient blames others for the
ways she hurts herself. The conflict begins with a stimulus that makes the
patient angry. She wards off her anger by punishing herself. Unable to see
how she punishes herself, she accuses others, blaming them for her
suffering. Undo externalization to establish an intrapsychic focus. To do so,
help the patient see that she does to herself what she blames others for
doing to her. Once she can see that her defenses cause her suffering, she
will have an internal focus that will lead to effective therapy.
Vignette One: Pointing Out Causality in Externalization
A depressed, masochistic patient reports that her husband asked if he
could insert his fist into her anus as part of their lovemaking. She told him it
was fine with her. A few minutes later in the session she continues.
Pt: He hurt me last night.
Th: How so?
Pt: He put his fist in my anus, and it hurt when he did it.
Th: He put his fist in your anus. Is that true?
Pt: Yes. I just told you he did.
Th: Do you mind if I offer you a different perspective?
Pt: Go ahead.
Th: He asked you whether he could put his fist in your anus. Right?
Pt: Yes.
Th: And at that point, you could have said yes or no, but you chose to
say yes.
Pt: But he didn’t want me to say no.
Th: So you said no to yourself instead. [By saying yes to him, she said
no to herself.]
Pt: Oh.
Th: You told him yes. He could put his fist in your anus. In effect, you
put his fist in your anus because you told him he could [correct
causality: she punished herself], but then you blame him for your
choice. You chose to say no to yourself, and you blame him for that
choice. [Externalization: rather than face how she punished herself,
she blamed him.] Do you see what I mean?
Pt: I didn’t think of it that way.
Th: If we think of it that way, what did you feel toward him when he
asked to put his fist in your anus?
Pt: I didn’t like the idea. [Defense: intellectualization.]
Th: But what was your feeling toward him?
Pt: I was angry.
Th: You were angry with him. Then we see that the way you dealt with
your anger was to turn the anger on yourself by inviting him to hurt
you.
Pt: I had forgotten that I had been angry with him. [Evidence of
repression.]
Th: Right. You felt angry with him, forgot your anger, and turned it on
yourself by inviting him to hurt you. It was as if you were inviting
him to punish you for being angry with him.
Pt: And then later I invited him to criticize the food I made for dinner.
[Increased insight into self-punishment as a defense.]
She sees her conflict of anger, anxiety, and the defense of selfpunishment, no longer blaming her husband for the ways she punishes
herself. Now she has an intrapsychic focus. To better understand the process
of unconscious causality in externalization, see table 9.1.
Table 9.1 Unconscious causality in externalization
Step one Stimulus Husband asked to insert his fist
Step two Feeling Anger
Step
three
Anxiety Striated muscles
Step four Defense Punish herself by saying yes and abusing
herself
Step five Externalization Blaming him for her choice to punish herself
We cannot explore her anger at her husband at first because her anger is
at a projection: her husband as an “abuser.” First, undo the defense of
externalization so she can see how she punished herself. Then help her face
her rage at him for asking to insert his fist. Never explore rage before the
defenses of blaming or complaining have been restructured.
Vignette Two: Deactivating Projection in Externalization
A patient enters the office quite agitated. For some weeks, he had
accused his girlfriend of having an affair with another man. Now the patient
was angry because she had broken up the relationship. She had tired of the
accusations, distrust, and arguments, so she moved out. The patient wanted
to talk about his anger toward her for breaking up the relationship.
Th: She broke up with you. Is that true?
Pt: What do you mean? Of course, it’s true. I just told you that she
broke up with me.
Th: Do you mind if I offer another point of view?
Pt: Okay.
Th: For weeks, you thought she was having an affair. Yet it’s my sense
that you have been having an affair with your projection. Rather
than listen to her, you listened to your fantasy. You ignored her
words; you paid attention to your fantasy. In effect, you had already
broken up with her and were having an affair with your fantasy.
You thought she was lying to you, but your story was lying to you
and being unfaithful to your best interests. Now the story has you
all to itself, because you chose it instead of her. Do you see what I
mean?
Fearing the emotional closeness with his girlfriend, he used the defense
of projection (“She is having an affair”). This allowed him to distance
himself from her but at the price of damaging the relationship. Then he
blamed her for the distress resulting from his own projection
(externalization). His conflict was that he had a feeling (related to emotional
closeness). This feeling triggered anxiety in his striated muscles. To ward
off his feeling and anxiety, he used the defense of projection (“You are
having an affair”). Since he did not see his projection and the ways it
damaged his relationship, he assumed his girlfriend was damaging the
relationship. So he used the defense of externalization (“She, not my
projection, damages our relationship”).
Therapists who do not see externalization make one of several mistakes.
They empathize with the patient as a victim without examining how he
creates his suffering. They explore the patient’s rage toward his
“victimizers,” thereby reinforcing his victim stance. Therapists can also err
by “problem solving,” that is, helping the patient assert himself with “cruel”
others. When the patient externalizes, he does not see how he punishes
himself. He mistakenly thinks he needs to take a stand against his so-called
abusers rather than take a stand against his self-abuse. Help him see his
internal conflict (anger, anxiety, self-punishment followed by blaming
someone else for the patient’s choice to punish himself). Then he can let go
of the defense, own his responsibility, face his feelings, and make new
adaptive choices.
HELPLESSNESS AND PASSIVITY
Some patients lack abilities we have to develop. Others present as if
they are less capable than they really are. The therapist asks, “Can we take a
look at the feeling toward your father?” The patient who uses the defenses
of helplessness and passivity responds:
“I can’t.”
“I’m not sure I have the energy.”
“I don’t know what you mean by feelings. Do you have a list of
feelings I could look at?”
“I wish I could tell you.”
“What do you think I feel?”
Passivity and helplessness can be defenses or a transference resistance.
[“If I act incapable of giving something to this relationship, would you give
to me what I withhold from you?” (will, engagement, attention, thought).]
This makes a therapeutic alliance impossible. Therefore, deactivate these
defenses.
But, the reader may ask, “Isn’t the patient merely depending on the
therapist?” We must differentiate healthy from pathological dependency.
Ideally, the therapist offers what the patient cannot give. Pathological
dependency occurs when the patient asks the therapist to give what the
patient withholds.
Vignette One: Pointing Out Reality
We can help some patients who use the defense of helplessness by
pointing out the reality consequences of that defense. Helplessness does not
help the patient.
Pt: I’m not sure I have the motivation for this. [Defense: helplessness.]
Th: That may be, but if you don’t have the motivation, we can’t help
you get to the bottom of your difficulties. [Point out reality.]
Pt: Isn’t there something you can do? [Could you make up for what I
refuse to give to this relationship?]
Th: If you don’t have the motivation, we will have to accept that you
don’t have what we need to get to the top of the mountain. We will
have to part ways, while I take those with the motivation to the top
of the mountain. [Point out reality.]
Vignette Two: Deactivating Projection
Some patients adopt a helpless stance by projecting their capacity onto
the therapist. In these cases, the therapist must point out and deactivate the
projection.
Th: What’s the feeling you have toward her?
Pt: I wish I could tell you. [Defense: helplessness.]
Th: What can we do about that?
Pt: What?
Th: What can we do about that? If you can’t tell us what you feel, we
won’t be able to help you. [Price of his defense.] So what can we do
about that? [Block helplessness by asking him what stance he wants
to take regarding this defense.]
Pt: Couldn’t you tell me what I feel? [Defense: helplessness to project
responsibility onto the therapist.]
Th: Neither I nor anyone else can tell you what you feel. Only you can
do that. [Block the projection.]
Pt: But what if I can’t tell what I feel? [Defense: helpless position.]
Th: Then you’ll have a real problem on your hands. [Block projection.]
You want me to help you with your feelings, but if you don’t know
what you are feeling right now, then obviously I won’t be able to
help you with it. [Price of his stance.]
Pt: Aren’t you supposed to be able to help me figure out what I feel?
[Project responsibility.]
Th: No. Only you can feel what you feel. [Block the projection.]
Pt: [Fidgets and shifts in his chair. Sign of rise of feeling and anxiety.
When the patient lets go of his defense, unconscious feeling, and
anxiety rise. After this rise of anxiety, ask about the feeling.]
Th: What do you notice feeling in your body right now?
Pt: Uncomfortable. [Anxiety.]
Th: Where do you notice that in your body?
Pt: Just tension in my back. [Striated muscles.]
Th: Tension in your back. That’s anxiety. [Label the anxiety.] What’s the
feeling toward me that’s triggering all this anxiety?
Some patients adopt a helpless position by denying their actual capacity,
which they have demonstrated previously. In those cases, remind the patient
of reality.
Pt: I can’t do it.
Th: That’s not true. You’ve already demonstrated that you can face these
feelings [list examples for the patient]. Together we can do this, if
you’ll give yourself a chance. Are you worth the effort?
Separate the patient from his helplessness by pointing out his agency.
He tells himself that he is helpless; he makes himself into an incapable man;
he takes a crippled position. Contrast his healthy goals with the helplessness
that could defeat them. To differentiate him further from his defense, ask,
“Why perpetuate your suffering this way?” “Why do this to yourself ?”
Deactivate projections by pointing out that the defenses hurt the patient,
not the therapist. The patient—not the therapist—will have to take a stand
against the defense or live with the consequences. The patient who waits for
magic waits forever.
Vignette Three: Hopelessness When Denial Breaks Down
Sometimes hopelessness is a way to take a helpless stance. However,
hopelessness can also be a sign of progress. For instance, a patient realizes
it is hopeless to expect the world to be the same as her fantasy. The
hopelessness of her fantasy emerges when her denial of reality breaks
down.
Pt: I think it is hopeless for me to look for a job. I will just be rejected.
Th: I think it is progress; you can see that. You know as well as I do that
since you are not fluent in English, it is impossible to get or hold a
job as an executive secretary. [Point out reality.]
Pt: But then I will not be able to buy a house! [Cries.]
Th: That is true. You will not be able to buy a house if you apply for
jobs you can’t hold. [Point out that behavior based on denial
(looking for jobs she won’t get) leads to defeat.]
Pt: But I cannot get a job. [Defense: denial. She can get a job in reality,
but not the one she wanted in fantasy. Her tears signal that her
denial in fantasy is breaking down.]
Th: That is not true. You can get a job, but it is impossible to get the job
you wanted, an executive secretary position. And how hard that is!
This fantasy was so beautiful. And how hard it is to let go of that
beautiful picture you had in your mind.
Pt: It was a very beautiful picture. [She observes her fantasy without
substituting it for reality.]
Projection
Projection is a defense by which we attribute to someone else a feeling,
impulse, quality, or wish belonging to ourselves. Our view of other people
becomes distorted. Rather than face our anger, we imagine the other person
is angry with us. Then we become afraid of or preoccupied with the
imaginary anger we place on him.
This example illustrates a key distinction between repressive and
regressive defenses. Repressive defenses effectively reduce our awareness
of feeling, so anxiety drops. We associate these defenses with a functioning
triangle of conflict: feeling evokes anxiety, which triggers defenses that
make us less aware of feeling and anxiety.
Regressive defenses do not work this way. The patient who projects
becomes more anxious, afraid of the person upon whom he has projected.
His anger is not repressed out of awareness; he sees it in (projected onto)
others. For instance, if angry with the therapist, he projects and believes the
therapist is angry with him. Thus, he fears the supposedly angry therapist.
This fear, created by projection, we call projective anxiety (H.
Davanloo, supervision 2002–2004). Regressive defenses like projection
trigger continual free-floating anxiety. They create a feedback loop: feeling
triggers anxiety, which triggers projection, adding projective anxiety—
which leads to more projection and projective anxiety, and so on. We cannot
regulate anxiety that is perpetuated by projection.
Restructure projection to undo the projective anxiety and establish an
intrapsychic perspective. A patient who projects believes other people cause
his anxiety and problems. To understand the difference between an
intrapsychic and externalizing focus, see table 9.2.
Table 9.2 Externalizing versus an internal focus for therapy
Projection Externalizing focus Internal focus
Causality “I am afraid of you.” “My
problem is outside me: it’s
you.”
“I have feelings. They trigger
anxiety. So I use the Defense of
projection. Then I fear you.”
“My problem is how I deal with
the feelings and anxiety inside
me.”
Goal of
therapy
“I think the problem is you.
You must prove to me that
you are not the same as my
projection. We are here to
examine you, not my
projection.”
“I need to see the difference
between you and my projection.
Then I can face my feeling, so I
won’t have to get anxious and
project instead.”
Patients who project the image of an aggressor fear the therapist will
traumatize them. But it is too late. The trauma they fear in the future already
occurred in the past (Winnicott 1965). Their projections chronically distort
reality inside and outside the therapy session.
Denial involves not seeing what is in myself. Projection involves seeing
what is not there in someone else. We deny something exists within
ourselves. We project that element onto others.
Denial of anger through negation: “I’m not angry.”
Projection of anger: “You are angry at me.”
Splitting: “Negative feelings like anger are ‘not me.’ Good feelings are
‘me’” (H. S. Sullivan 1953b).
When the patient relates to her projection instead of you, her experience
of you and the therapy becomes distorted and more negative. Viewing you
through the filter of her projection, she becomes suspicious and
hypervigilant. She can react to her projection upon you by hiding from,
criticizing, or leaving you [hoping she left the projection behind in the
therapist’s office].
Projection distorts perceptions of reality to varying degrees. A patient
who generalizes projects onto you but recognizes those same feelings and
impulses within herself. In classical projection, the patient attributes her
unacceptable unconscious tendencies to someone else who she believes
possesses them (Knight 1940, 335).
Although often considered a primitive defense, projection occurs across
the spectrum of psychoneurosis (Willick 1985). Thus, we need to assess the
function of the projection; the content of the projection (Frosch 1983); the
patient’s self-observing capacity (Bateman and Fonagy 2004; A. Freud
1936; S. Freud 1923/1961c; Ten Have de Labije 2001) and symbolic
thinking (Bateman and Fonagy 2004; Fonagy et al. 2002; Segal 1981); and
the pathway of unconscious anxiety discharge (H. Davanloo, supervision
2002–2004).
Function of Projection
Assess the function of a projection before analyzing and interpreting its
content. Projection functions as a distancing tactic when anxiety is
discharged in the striated muscles.
Th: What is the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: [Sighs.] My wife says I am a control freak. [Defense: projection.]
Here, the projection allows the patient to remain uninvolved in
treatment. In such a case, projection functions as a tactical, not a regressive,
defense.
Th: Since your wife is not here, I can’t help her. [Block the tactical
defense.] So what is the problem you would like me to help you
with?
In contrast, projection functions as a “relocation” strategy for
frightening internal experiences when anxiety is discharged in
cognitive/perceptual disruption.
Pt: I can see from your eyes that you hate me for not visiting my
mother.
Here, the projection “relocates” the superego onto the therapist to avoid
the conflict within the patient between his anger toward his mother and his
inner judgment of it.
The Pathway of Unconscious Anxiety Discharge
The interventions used for projections vary according to the patient’s
pathway of unconscious anxiety discharge and self-observing capacity.
When anxiety is channeled in the striated muscles, block the projection by
inviting feeling. “There is that barrier again. If you don’t put up that barrier,
what is the feeling toward me?”
Projection can also result from cognitive/perceptual disruption. When
projection causes a loss of reality testing, restructure the projection,
differentiate the therapist from the projection, and then regulate anxiety
(Cornelissen 2005). For instance, some patients who use projection present
with tension from head to toe but with no sighing or hand clenching, and
thoracic rather than abdominal breathing. This is a freeze reaction in which
the patient equates the therapist with her projection. Deactivate the
projection, regulate anxiety, and then explore the feeling. As long as the
patient experiences cognitive/perceptual disruption, interpretation of
projection can have little integrative effect.
The following vignette shows how to help the patient differentiate the
therapist from the projection. No exploration of other issues will be useful
until the projection is deactivated.
Pt: I’m afraid you want to hurt me. [Defense: projection.]
Th: Are you seeing me as an abuser again? [Point out the projection
causing the freeze reaction.]
Pt: Yes, but maybe you will hurt me!
Th: If you think I am a potential abuser, you absolutely must not open
up to me. [Clarify the consequences of the patient’s assumption
(projection).]
Pt: [Rise of anxiety in the patient in response to drop in the projection.]
Th: What do you notice feeling inside?
Pt: I don’t think you are listening to me. [Defense: intellectualization.
This repressive defense reveals a rise of anger.]
Th: It sounds like you had a reaction to what I said. What do you notice
feeling toward me?
Pt: [Sighs.] Irritated.
Th: It sounds like you got irritated with me, and then your irritation
traveled across the room where you thought I was irritated and
wanted to hurt you. Do you see how your irritation toward me
turned around on you? [Point out the triangle of conflict: feelings,
anxiety, and the defense of projection.]
Pt: I didn’t quite hear what you said there. [Cognitive/perceptual
disruption when the projection drops, feeling, and anxiety rises so
the patient goes over the threshold of anxiety tolerance.]
Th: Are you having a little trouble thinking right now?
Pt: I’m feeling a little dizzy.
Th: Let’s take a moment to put this together. This dizziness is a sign of
anxiety. So we are noticing you were a bit miffed with me. Then,
when we noticed you had put that feeling onto me, your anxiety
went up, and you got dizzy there. Do you see how that happened
here? [Offer repeated cognitive summaries of the process until the
patient’s anxiety is back in the striated muscles and the freeze
reaction drops.]
Self-Observing Capacity
Patients usually are unable to observe their projection or differentiate it
from the person upon whom they project. (“No. That’s not my opinion.
That’s how she is!”) This inability is known as symbolic equation (Segal
1981). The patient equates reality with his fantasy (the projection). For
instance, a patient reported something illegal he had done and then accused
the therapist of judging him. Step one: He judged himself for his crime. Step
two: he projected his inner judgment onto the therapist. Then he was unable
to differentiate the therapist from his projection (Winnicott 1971).
Help him differentiate the therapist from his projection by mobilizing, in
this order, the ability to (1) see and pay attention to the defense, (2)
differentiate reality from fantasy, (3) see the price of the defense; and (4)
bear the feelings and anxiety that arise when integrating what he had
projected. Restructure the pathway of unconscious anxiety di