Projection of the Superego: A Spectrum
One of the most common projections is projection of the superego. This
projection occurs along a spectrum from good reality testing to loss of
reality testing, and from the projection of a mature conscience to the
projection of severe aggression onto others. The following examples show
how projection of the superego can occur across the spectrum of
psychoneurosis.
Psychotic level of character structure: Projection of a pathological
superego onto a figure in the outside world—loss of reality testing.
A schizophrenic woman has a delusion: “I’m afraid the mayor wants
to cut off my head.” She feels murderous rage toward her boyfriend.
Rather than feel the conflict between her rage and her judgment of it,
she projects her superego onto the mayor. She cannot differentiate
reality from her fantasy.
Borderline level of character structure: Projection of the
pathological superego onto voices. The patient is aware the voices
are in his mind but disavows that he is punishing himself. He
becomes angry with the therapist during the session. A moment later
he says, “The voices in my head say I should kill myself.” He turns
the anger onto himself while attributing this self-attack to “the
voices.”
Neurotic level of character structure: Projection of a healthy
conscience. A patient reports something unethical she did. Then she
says, “You probably don’t think this is a good idea.” The therapist
replies, “I think that’s your conscience talking.”
This patient can differentiate the therapist from her attribution. In
addition, notice the content of the projection. She does not project an
unhealthy part of her superego but an integrated conscience.
Psychotic patients project an extremely severe superego onto others and
fear it there, unable to differentiate their projection from reality. Patients at
a borderline level of character pathology either project or identify with the
pathological superego. Deactivating their projections can trigger some brief
cognitive/perceptual disruption and grief and guilt. Neurotic patients
integrate their projected conscience with less difficulty. See table 9.3.
Table 9.3 The spectrum of projection of the superego and reality testing
Level of
character
structure
Type of superego
projection
Level of symbolic functioning
Psychotic Experiences hallucinated
voices, delusions of
persecution
Loss of reality testing
Borderline Alternately projects or
identifies with the
superego
Transient loss of distinction
between the therapist and the
projection
Neurotic Demonstrates integrated
superego
Ability to differentiate reality
and fantasy
Content of the Projection—Parts of Oneself
Moderately resistant patients may project their conscience onto you
(“You might not think that was a good idea”). Highly resistant patients may
project their awareness of an internal problem (“My wife thinks there is a
problem, but I don’t”), or a desire for help onto others (“My doctor said I
should come”), or onto the therapist (“What do you think I should work
on?”). Fragile patients may project their will to do therapy upon you (“I’m
afraid of the questions you want to ask me”) and then become afraid of you.
Patients with character disorders may project their superego (“I can see you
think I’m a terrible person”) and then fear or become angry at your
imagined criticism.
Example One—anger
Pt: [Angry with the therapist.] Are you angry with me? [Defense:
projection of anger.]
Th: Do you notice you put your anger over onto me, as soon as you are
feeling it yourself? If you don’t relocate your anger, how do you
experience your anger here toward me?
Example Two—grief
Pt: [Struggling with her grief.] I’m sorry. I don’t want to overwhelm
you. [The patient, overwhelmed with her loss, projects her grief
onto the therapist.]
Th: But who is feeling the loss? [Block the projection.]
Example Three—awareness
Pt: My wife thinks this is a problem. [Projection of his awareness.]
Th: Since your wife is not here, I can’t help her, but I’m wondering
what the problem is with which you would like me to help you?
[Block the projection and invite him to declare an internal
problem.]
Pt: How should I handle this? [Projection of his ability to solve his
problems.]
Th: Only you can know for sure. [Block the projection.]
Example Four—superego
Pt: You probably think this is stupid. [Psychodiagnosis: anxiety in the
striated muscles.]
Th: What’s the evidence for that? [Differentiate the projection from the
therapist.]
Pt: Well, you haven’t said anything, but it could be true.
Th: But what’s the evidence?
Pt: Well, there isn’t any yet.
Th: There’s a thought in your head that I think badly of you, but there is
no evidence to support the thought in your head. Could this be your
critical conscience inside you calling you names?
Pt: I’m always criticizing myself.
Th: Sometimes you criticize yourself, and sometimes you imagine your
conscience is out here in me, when it’s been in you all the time.
Example Five—will
Pt: You want me to share my feelings. [Projection of his will to share
onto the therapist.]
Th: But who is it who came here wanting to know what was driving his
depression and anxiety? [Deactivate the projection of will by
reminding the patient of his will.]
The patient will react in a specific way to the projection he has placed
on the therapist. Table 9.4 shows these common reactions to projections.
Table 9.4 Projection and the resulting subjective state of the patient
Content of
the
projection
Result
Pathological
Superego
Fears the therapist’s judgment
Healthy
desires
Passively waits for the therapist to take responsibility for the
therapy. Or fears the therapist will make her reveal her inner
life
Rageful
impulses
Fears the therapist’s rage
Loving
desires
Fears the therapist will violate her boundaries
Whether projection is a tactical or regressive defense depends on the
pathway of anxiety discharge, the self-observing capacities, the content that
is projected, and the degree of symbolic equation. The highly resistant
patient uses projection as a tactical defense to keep the therapist at a
distance. His anxiety remains in the striated muscles. He uses repressive or
tactical defenses and suffers no loss of reality testing. Block his projections,
and return to the focus on feeling.
In contrast, the fragile patient uses projection as a regressive defense to
relocate internal experience. Her anxiety is discharged into
cognitive/perceptual disruption. She uses regressive defenses and suffers
from a loss of reality testing. She becomes terrified. Unable to differentiate
between reality and her projection, she suffers from projective anxiety. Now
she has a misalliance with a projection rather than a therapeutic alliance
with the therapist. Restructure her projection, regulate anxiety, and then
explore feeling. Table 9.5 shows how to assess whether a projection is a
tactical or regressive defense.
Table 9.5 Psychodiagnosis of projection as a tactical or regressive
defense
Qualities Projection as
tactical
defense
Projection as a regressive defense
Function Keep the
therapist at a
distance
“Relocate” feelings or parts of the mind
Pathway of
anxiety
discharge
Striated Cognitive/perceptual disruption
Reality
testing
Intact Impaired or lost
Other
defenses
Tactical,
repressive, and
character
defenses
Regressive and character defenses
Projective
anxiety?
No Yes
Intervention Block the
projection, and
then return to
the focus.
Restructure the projection until reality
testing and striated muscle tension returns,
and then explore the feeling triggering the
projection
See figure 9.1, which shows the sequence of interventions to use when
assessing whether projection is a tactical or regressive defense.
Figure 9.1 Psychodiagnosis of projection
If the projection is a regressive defense, the patient will experience a
loss of reality testing, unable to differentiate the therapist from the
projection. If the patient relates to a projection rather than the therapist, she
will be in a misalliance with the projection rather than a therapeutic alliance
with the therapist. Figure 9.2 shows the steps of assessment and
intervention when addressing three common types of projection.
Figure 9.2 Restructuring the loss of reality testing in patients who
project
PROVOCATION
Some patients have trouble tolerating their guilt. To avoid their guilt and
the need to repair the damage they have inflicted on a relationship, they
either punish themselves or provoke others to punish them. Help the patient
see his guilt and how he provokes others to punish him. This will help
establish an intrapsychic focus for the therapy.
Pt: I knew I shouldn’t be doing this. It didn’t feel right, but after I had
sex with that bimbo at the bar, I came home. My wife asked me
how my day was, and I snapped at her. I don’t know what it was,
but I was so pissed off at her. I was getting a glass of water at the
sink. I don’t even know what she said. All I know is I blew up,
turned around, and threw a glass of water in her face. She got all
pissed off and told me to get the hell out of the house if I was going
to treat her like that. I left the house for a while to cool down.
Th: It sounds like you were not feeling too good about having sex with
the woman at the bar. What was that feeling?
Pt: I felt guilty. My friends have talked about stepping out on their
wives and how great it was, but it didn’t feel so great to me.
Th: You felt guilty for having sex with this other woman, but the way
you dealt with the guilt was to go home and provoke your wife to
punish you, even though she didn’t know the real reason. [Point out
the defense of provoking punishment from others to avoid his guilt.]
Pt: I hadn’t thought of that. I was just angry with her for being hard on
me. [Accuses his wife of being hard on him, yet his defense of selfpunishment was hard on him.]
Th: You thought she was being hard on you. Yet by throwing the water
on her for no reason, you were hard on her, and you invited her to
punish you. You felt guilty, but rather than face your guilt, you
goaded her into punishing you. [Point out how he projects his inner
judgment onto his wife rather than feel his guilt.]
Pt: That’s true. I didn’t feel right about it afterward.
Impulsive patients provoke others to punish them rather than feel guilty
for their own misdeeds. Then they resent the “punishing” person rather than
their defense of provoking punishment.
SOMATIZATION
Patients somatize in session in response to a rise of feelings. They do
not usually see the link between a rise of feelings and the defense of
somatization. Help the patient see the following sequence: rise of feelings,
anxiety, and the defense of somatization. (See chapter 7 for examples.)
WEEPINESS
Tears come in to cover up anger. As soon as weepiness begins, intervene
to avoid a depressive regression in therapy. Help the patient see how tears
come in to wash away her anger. Then show her how this defense makes
her depressed, unable to take effective action. (See chapter 10 for more
information on weepiness.)
SUMMARY
Address regressive defenses systematically to develop an intrapsychic
perspective. Remind the patient of reality: “You hoped you could leave your
rage in my office when you left last time, but now we can see that no matter
how far you run, your feelings are still inside you. No matter where you go,
there you are.” “You thought the hospital was persecuting you, but now we
can see how you have been persecuting yourself. The hospital is not making
you feel worse. Your self-persecution and self-attack is making you feel
worse. The bad news is this: you are hurting yourself. The good news is
that, since you are the one doing it, it could be entirely under your control.”
Regressive defenses perpetuate the patient’s anxiety, making it worse.
Restructure them to regulate anxiety, mobilize self-observation, and then
explore feelings.
To restructure regressive defenses, help the patient sequentially
1. Observe and pay attention to regressive defenses and the warded-off
feelings
2. See causality
3. Differentiate reality from projections
4. Let go of regressive defenses
Build these capacities so the patient will be strong enough to bear the
unlocking of unconscious feelings. By doing so, you will avoid
misalliances, regression, and patient drop out.
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Coughlin Della Selva, P. (1996). Restructuring regressive defenses. In
Intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy: Theory and technique (pp.
79–103). New York: Wiley.
Davanloo, H. (1990). ISTDP with highly resistant depressed patients. In
Unlocking the unconscious (pp. 1–27). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Davanloo, H. (1990). The technique of unlocking the unconscious in
patients suffering from functional disorders. part 1: Restructuring the
ego’s defenses. In Unlocking the unconscious (pp. 283–306).
Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Korff, P. von (1998). Early management of unconscious defiance in
Davanloo’s intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy, part 1.
International Journal of Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy, 12, 183–
208.
RECOMMENDED MATERIALS
You may want to visit http://www.istdpinstitute.com/DVDs/ and get the
DVD series on restructuring projection in a borderline patient. It will help
you see projection, what causes it, and how to intervene in different ways to
help restore the patient’s reality testing.
If you would like to view the video on projection presented by Jon
Frederickson, visit the URL below. The video offers several examples of
projection along with specific interventions for them.
Projection (December 20, 2012). http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=pPY2wKhiSWA.
D
CHAPTER TEN
Defensive Affects
efensive affects are feelings that result from or function as defenses.
Patients in the fragile spectrum suffer from overwhelming feelings,
which result from regressive defenses. Projection floods them with
projective anxiety. Defensive weepiness overwhelms them with depression.
Externalization fills impulsive or paranoid people with endless rage.
Suppose a man projects, imagining others are angry or critical of him. In
response, he will remain chronically angry, fearful, or depressed about this
imaginary rejection. Unable to differentiate others from his projection, his
feelings can escalate and become catastrophic. In a few patients,
dysregulated emotions result from neurocognitive deficits or brain injury.
For most people, however, dysregulated feelings function as or result from
regressive defenses. Thus, the therapist must help the patient see and turn
against defenses generating those defensive affects.
For instance, a patient projects her self-judgment onto her boyfriend,
believing he will judge her. She feels sad and depressed as a result. If we
encourage her to feel her sadness as deeply as possible, she will feel more
depressed, unable to see her projection. Never explore defensive affects.
Deactivate the defenses that create them or help the patient differentiate
feelings from defensive affects.
This point is important for all expressive therapies. According to
psychotherapy research, up to 10 percent of patients can become worse with
an experiential therapy (Lilienfeld 2007). Why? Exploring and deepening
defensive affects strengthens patients’ regressive defenses, leading to
increased depression, anxiety, and somatic symptoms. Experiencing
defensive sadness increases depression and hopelessness. Expressing
defensive rage increases acting out, projection, and destruction of
relationships. Thus, differentiating feelings from defensive affects is
essential to avoid harming patients in an emotionfocused therapy.
DIFFERENTIATING EXPRESSIVE CRYING FROM
DEFENSIVE CRYING
Expressive crying and grief, though painful, remind us of our loss and
our capacity to love. We feel relieved and lighter after expressive crying.
Before the start of genuine grief, sympathetic nervous system activation
rises as the patient wards off the grief. But as defenses drop and the patient
cries, this sympathetic activation decreases and parasympathetic activation
increases. The breathing and pulse rate slow, the patient cries, and her
mouth produces more saliva (Fogel 2009; Gross, Fredrickson, and
Levenson 1994; Hendriks, Rottenberg, and Vingerhoets 2007; Rottenberg,
Gross, and Gotlib 2003). Expressive crying flushes out toxic stress
hormones from the body and calms the patient (Fogel 2009, 110–112; D.
Sullivan, Block, and Pena 1996; Walter 2006).
In contrast, defensive affects of sadness and weepiness ward off other
feelings. Table 10.1 presents common types of genuine grief and defensive
crying (see Fogel 2009, 112–113).
Table 10.1 Types of crying
Type of cry Features Therapist
countertransference
“Good”
crying
Awareness of one’s bodily experience
of feeling. Calming, brief, easily
soothed, most likely to have tears.
Patient feels nurturing
and affection.
Protest
crying
Intense, loud, angry sobbing, helpless
and unsoothable. Exhausted rather
than relieved.
Pateint feels apathy,
irritation, pushed
away, or guilty.
Infantile
crying
Lip quivering, trembling, may be
tearless, repeated stereotypical
movements. May be related to
infantile attachment trauma.
Patient feels
unreachable, lost
inside of herself.
Unprovoked
or
Unprovoked by any obvious thought
or stimulus, based on imaginary
stimulus or unacknowledged grief.
Therapist feels
confused, unable to
prolonged
crying
find an explanation
for the crying.
Dramatic
crying
Not clearly connected to an emotion.
Socially inappropriate, dead feeling
inside. Possibly linked to childhood
rejection and acting out to get
attention.
Therapist feels
manipulated by
attention seeking.
Tries to avoid the
patient’s entreaties.
Sources: T. Alexander 2003; Mills and Wooster 1987; J. Nelson 2000.
Protest crying can occur when the patient projects the superego onto the
therapist: “You withhold from me, so I can hope for nothing from you.” The
patient becomes lost in sad hopelessness in front of the seemingly
withholding therapist. Do not explore her feelings of rage and hopelessness,
the result of projection. Instead, address the projection.
Infantile crying can occur when a patient who punishes herself, fears
that the therapist will punish her. Fearing the “punitive” therapist, she cries
with fearful trembling. Or a patient may feel anger while covering it with
anxiety (which looks like infantile crying).
Unprovoked crying does not occur except in neurological conditions.
Otherwise, a stimulus (either real or imaginary) always triggers crying.
Prolonged crying, which brings no relief, is a defense (warding-off feeling)
or the result of a defense. For instance, if a patient with a severe superego
calls herself ugly, she may project her superego onto her boyfriend: “He
thinks I’m ugly.” In response, she cries without stopping and finds no relief.
She is not grieving a genuine loss in reality. Instead, she suffers from an
imaginary loss created by her projection (a constantly “rejecting”
boyfriend). The crying can’t stop until her projection stops. These patients
do not suffer from dysregulated affects but from dysregulating defenses.
For instance, rather than express her rage for not getting the attention
she wants, she may hide it under dramatic crying. Dramatic crying can also
be a form of discharge to get rid of the internal experience of her guilt and
prove how badly she feels.
Sometimes therapists confuse these defensive affects with genuine
sadness. The following criteria differentiate genuine grief from defensive
weepiness.
Process: Sadness and grief trigger anxiety and defenses. Since
weepiness either functions as a defense or results from one, it does
not trigger anxiety and defenses. Weepiness emerges after defenses,
for example, projection or externalization. Or it arises after anger to
ward it off.
Real versus an imaginary stimulus: Grieving involves a genuine loss,
for example, “My husband died of cancer.” Defensive sadness
involves imaginary loss, for instance, a patient with a history of
choosing abusive men claims that all men are bad and that she will
never find a good one. In response to her projection that all men
will be bad to her, she cries over imaginary losses in the future.
Physiological activation: Genuine grieving involves parasympathetic
activation during which the body relaxes, the patient sighs, and
cries with a loose belly, and tears flow freely. She feels more deeply
connected to herself and the therapist. Defensive “sadness”
involves continuous sympathetic activation during which the body
remains tense, the heart rate and breathing remain elevated, the
throat is tight, and the patient does not experience a deeper
connection to herself or the therapist.
Unconscious signaling: Rising grief triggers anxiety in the form of
tension in the striated muscles. Once the patient feels the grief,
anxiety drops. The belly and throat relax and parasympathetic
activation dominates. In contrast, during weepiness, tension
continues with heightened sympathetic activation.
Defense activation: Grief triggers defenses and emerges more fully
when the patient lets go of her defenses. In contrast, weepiness
functions as or results from regressive defenses; it does not evoke
them.
Architecture of the experience: Grief rises and falls in the shape of a
wave. In contrast, weepiness fluctuates according to the amount of
anger it must ward off or the projection the patient is using.
Result of experiencing the feeling: Genuine grieving brings relief and
clarity. Defensive sadness brings no relief or clarity, just exhaustion
and increased pain. For instance, the woman who projects that her
boyfriend will reject her feels no relief after crying because she
believes she is still with an imaginary rejecter in whom she has no
hope.
Weepiness: Intervention
Weepiness arises as soon as the depressed patient begins to experience
her rage. If the weepiness is not rapidly addressed, she becomes more
depressed in session. In this example, notice how the therapist identifies the
patient’s weepiness immediately and mobilizes her attention to stop the
regression. Once the regressive defense stops, explore the feeling again.
Emotion differentiation is essential to emotion regulation (Barrett et al.
2001).
Th: What is the feeling toward your boyfriend for dumping you on
Valentine’s Day?
Pt: I’m upset. [Defense: cover word.]
Th: Clearly he upset you. That’s what he did. What’s the feeling toward
him for doing that?
Pt: I’m angry. [Becomes tearful. Defense: weepiness.]
Th: Do you notice how these tears come in right now? [Mobilize
patient’s attention to the defense.]
Pt: [Nods.]
Th: Notice how these tears come in to wash away your anger as soon as
you feel it? [Label the defense.]
Pt: I feel sad now. [Psychodiagnosis: she does not differentiate her
defensive sadness from her anger nor does she see its function: to
cover up her anger.]
Th: Do you see how this sadness and tears come in to cover up and
wash away your anger? [Point out the function of the defense.]
Pt: I think so.
Th: Do you think that these tears are washing away your anger? Do you
think these tears might be making you depressed? [Link the defense
to her presenting problem.]
Pt: Absolutely.
Th: Would you like to take an honest look at this anger so it won’t have
to get covered with tears and so we could help you overcome this
depression? [Mobilize the patient’s will to engage in the therapeutic
task.]
Initially, she cannot feel her anger nor differentiate it from defensive
affects such as anxiety and sadness. Once weepiness begins, help her
observe its defensive function. Once the weepiness stops, invite the feeling
again.
Defensive Weepiness in Response to Self-Attack
Notice how the therapist identifies and draws the patient’s attention to
the defense of self-attack immediately. In this way, the therapist interrupts
the regression into depression. Then the therapist helps the patient face the
feeling covered up by the self-attack.
Th: How do you experience this rage toward your boss for putting you
down?
Pt: I should have finished college. If I had, I wouldn’t be in this
situation. I’m such an idiot. [Cries. Defense: self-attack.]
Th: You are describing yourself now, but do you notice you were freer
to describe your boss a minute ago? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: Yes, but—
Th: [Interrupt the defense of self-attack.] But if we don’t describe you,
can we take a look at your boss? It sounds like you have a feeling
toward your boss. Could we take a look at the feeling toward your
boss?
Pt: Okay. [Weepiness stops.]
Th: What is the feeling toward him?
Pt: Anger.
If the therapist does not block self-attack, weepiness and depression will
deepen in the session. Exploring weepiness will make the patient feel even
more depressed, and her self-attack will resume the next time she feels
angry. Always block the self-attack that causes weepiness and help the
patient see its defensive function. Then you will have blocked the selfattack, which causes a regression into depression.
Weepiness in Response to Projection of the Superego
In this example, the patient hates herself and projects that men will
think she is fat and ugly. The therapist explores to find out if the patient is
projecting the superego onto him. Then the therapist helps the patient see
the difference between him and her projection. Then he helps her see how
she judges herself internally. Once this is clear, the therapist can explore the
feeling toward him. As long as she projects her superego onto the therapist,
she will feel a weepy despair of ever being accepted by the
superego/therapist.
Th: Since we are also forming a relationship here, I wonder how that
fear is in operation here with me? [Explore to see if she is
projecting onto the therapist.]
Pt: I’m afraid you are judging my weight. [Cries. Defensive affect
resulting from her projection.]
Th: What’s the evidence that I’m judging your weight? [Block the
projection.]
Pt: No evidence really. But you can see I’m overweight.
Th: But who just called you overweight? [Block the projection.]
Pt: I did.
Th: You just called yourself overweight. So who has that thought?
Pt: Me.
Th: You are judging your weight, but then you put that judgment onto
me. Do you see how that just happened? [Point out the projection.]
Pt: I do now. [Teariness has stopped.]
Th: If we put that judgment off to the side, if you don’t judge yourself,
can we take a look at the feeling toward me right now?
The patient was angry with me, judged her anger, and then projected
that I judged her. This triggered her weepiness. Angry with men, she
punished herself through self-judging, and then imagined they would judge
and reject her. Once we cleared up her projection, her weepiness stopped.
Deactivate the projection that creates the weepiness, and the weepiness will
stop.
Grief is a response to real loss: a spouse dies. Defensive weepiness can
be a response to an imaginary loss: the patient fantasizes that a man will
reject her. In the first example, grief is in response to an external stimulus in
reality. In the second example, weepiness is in response to an internal
stimulus in her imagination. She projects onto her date, imagines him
rejecting her, and becomes sad. She is not aware of how she rejects herself.
She is aware that she believes men will reject her. Then she can fear, be
angry at, or feel sad over these “rejecting” men. But these feelings are in
response to her projection. Do not explore any feelings resulting from
projections. Instead, identify and clarify the defense of projection.
If we explore the patient’s rage toward a projection she puts onto others,
she will become more enraged, keep equating others with her projections,
and become more entrenched in the victim stance. Help her differentiate
other people from her projections to establish an intrapsychic focus. Then
explore the feelings triggering the defense.
DEFENSIVE RAGE
Defensive rage is based on the defenses of projection and
externalization or it wards off grief. Sometimes therapists confuse defensive
rage with genuine rage. The following criteria differentiate genuine from
defensive forms of rage.
Process: The feeling of anger occurs before anxiety and defense.
Defensive rage comes up after feeling and anxiety. For instance,
defensive rage occurs after the feeling of grief to ward it off.
Real versus an imaginary stimulus: Genuine anger results from a
stimulus in reality. For example, “My husband hit me.” Defensive
anger involves imaginary stimuli based on defenses such as
projection. For instance, a patient who criticizes himself projects
that other people do not respect him. He is continually furious with
them for their supposed disrespect. Genuine anger goes toward a
real enemy; defensive rage goes toward an imaginary one. Suppose
a patient yells at and insults her husband until he finally stomps out
of the house. Then she is angry with him for “abandoning” her. Yet
through her provocation, she artificially created her enemy (Bergler
1961).
Physiological activation: When the impulse of genuine rage passes, the
patient relaxes and feels relief. In contrast, the experience of the
impulse in defensive rage, expressing rage toward a projection,
gives no relief. The patient is still relating to a terrible, unchanging
person: the projection. Since projection continues, so does the
defensive rage.
Unconscious signaling: Genuine anger triggers anxiety in the body.
Once the patient feels the anger, anxiety drops. Defensive anger, the
result of a defense (usually projection), does not trigger anxiety or
defenses. Thus, raging at length without defenses arising is
defensive anger.
Defense activation: Genuine rage triggers defenses and emerges more
fully when defenses drop. Defensive rage functions as a defense, so
it doesn’t trigger repressive defenses. Instead, projection or
externalization create and sustain the defensive rage.
Architecture of the experience: Genuine rage rises and falls in the shape
of a wave. Defensive rage rises rapidly due to projection and
remains high as long as the patient projects. Defensive anger
remains chronically elevated because of chronic projection.
Result of experiencing the feeling: The experience of genuine anger
brings relief and clarity. Defensive rage leads to no relief, only
exhaustion and despair. The patient who chronically projects onto
his wife feels perpetual rage or despair. The pseudoclarity that
results is merely the result of a deepened belief in the projection: “I
always knew she was a completely horrible person.” The
experience of defensive rage encourages the patient to project
more, develop a more distorted sense of others, and become
increasingly hopeless.
Differentiating Normal Rage from Defensive Rage
Normal rage occurs in response to a stimulus in external reality: you hit
me. Defensive rage (based on projection) occurs in response to a wrong
done in fantasy: I imagine you are judging me, and then become enraged
with you. If someone harmed the patient in reality, explore the reactive rage
as deeply as possible. Do not explore rage resulting from projection.
Instead, address the projection to establish an intrapsychic focus. Let us
look at some additional factors that differentiate genuine from defensive
rage (Bergler 1959, 69–70).
Use: Normal rage is used exclusively for self-defense. Defensive rage is
used indiscriminately.
Object: Normal rage is toward a real enemy who hurt you. “He called
my work a piece of trash in front the entire class.” Defensive rage is
toward an imaginary enemy, created by distorted fantasies or
projections. “I just knew she would say I should visit her on
Sunday, so I let her have it before she could say a word.” Normal
rage is provoked by others. Defensive rage provokes a fight.
Guilt: Normal rage does not provoke guilt because it is proportional,
directed toward the person who attacked. “The normal person
doesn’t pick a fight; he … defends himself when attacked” (Bergler
1948, 29). Neurotic rage always triggers guilt because it goes out
on the wrong person to a disproportionate extent. The patient’s
projections trigger his rage, not the other person’s actions.
Dose: The amount of normal rage corresponds to the provocation.
Defensive rage corresponds to the fantasy or projection. A small
slight plus projection triggers an excessive response.
Purpose: Normal rage has the purpose of stopping an enemy. Defensive
rage has the purpose of triggering retaliation and punishment from
an imaginary enemy.
Normal rage: I consciously intend to harm the other.
Defensive rage: I unconsciously arrange to harm myself.
Timing: The healthy person waits to express his rage when it is adaptive
and his enemy is vulnerable. He can wait. Defensive rage occurs
immediately without an ability to wait.
Stimulus: Normal rage is a reaction to a real stimulus in the external
world. Defensive rage is often a reaction to an imaginary stimulus
in the internal world.
Provocation: Normal rage cannot be easily provoked. Defensive rage
can.
Pleasure: Normal rage does not bring pleasure. It is done as a necessary
but disagreeable job. We experience defensive rage as exciting and
pleasurable in advance, even though it provokes punishment in the
end.
Does the patient seek success or defeat?: The normal person fights to
succeed. The neurotic person provokes fights to lose, even though
he claims he wants to win. His pattern of defeats, however, reveals
the underlying result and aim: suffering.
Defensive Rage to Cover Grief
Sometimes patients use defensive rage to cover up their grief. In this
example, notice how the therapist assesses the patient’s response and sees
the defense of devaluation. If the patient devalues her husband, she can
claim she lost nothing. But to ward off the grief, she must be enraged
forever at a devalued husband. Thus, the therapist must help the patient see
and let go of her devaluation so she can face what she did value in him and
has lost forever.
Th: I’m sorry to hear of your husband’s death. I know how hard this has
been for you during this ordeal with his cancer. How are you
feeling now?
Pt: [Tears.] I’m glad the SOB is dead. What a relief! When I look back,
I wonder what good he ever was to me. [Defensive rage based on
devaluation.]
Th: It’s as if you want to cover your tears with the rage instead. If only
he had been worthless, then you wouldn’t have to bear this loss of
what was good in him. [Point out the defense.]
Pt: A lot of good it does me now. [Defense: devaluation.]
Th: He did a lot of good for you then. But death does you no good right
now. Death took him away.
Pt: [Cries.]
Defensive Rage in Response to a Projection
The following example concerns a fragile patient who constantly fears
that other people want to hurt her.
Pt: I gave a presentation at work yesterday and the evaluator came in to
sit next to my boss. After my presentation the evaluator was really
critical. He said he didn’t know what I was talking about. He said
my presentation was unclear, and that I had not even spoken on the
right topic. I was afraid he was going to get me fired. Fortunately,
my boss spoke up and said she thought my presentation was clear,
and that the topic was one she had suggested to me. I didn’t really
have to fear my boss, but now I’m afraid the evaluator is going to
retaliate and get me fired. [Having been angry at the evaluator for
criticizing her, she projects her anger onto him, fears he will hurt
her, and is then angry at him as a imaginary retaliator.]
Defensive Anger Due to Projection of the Superego
Notice how the therapist assesses the patient’s response and sees that the
patient projects her superego onto the therapist and does not differentiate
him from her projection. Thus, the therapist must deactivate the projection
so the patient will have a therapeutic alliance with him instead of a
misalliance with her projection. As long as she projects a superego onto
him, she will be enraged with him.
Pt: I’m angry with you because I can see you are judging and criticizing
me. [Projection of superego.]
Th: What is the evidence I am judging you? [Point out reality.]
Pt: I just feel that way.
Th: I understand you feel that way, but my question was different. What
is the evidence to support your feeling? What is the evidence I am
judging and criticizing you?
Pt: Well, there isn’t any evidence yet. But there could be!
Th: There is no evidence that I am criticizing you. So where is that
thought of criticism coming from? Who is having that thought?
Pt: I am.
Th: You are having a critical thought but then you attributed it to me.
But now we can see that the critical thought is in you. Is there a
tendency for you to be too hard on yourself?
Pt: Yes. I criticize myself all the time.
Th: Can we take a look at what is underneath that self-criticism right
now?
Help the patient see the difference between the therapist and the
patient’s projection of the superego so she can observe her defense of selfcriticism and the anger she is criticizing. Then explore any angry feelings
coming up toward the therapist.
Defensive Anger Based on Externalization
In this example, notice how the therapist helps the patient see the
choices she made that caused her suffering. The therapist will focus on
elements of reality upon which they agree. Then he will use those elements
of reality to help the patient see how she caused her suffering.
Pt: [Arrives to the session twenty minutes late.] I’m so angry with Sadie.
She wanted to catch a ride with me downtown when I came to my
session. But then she was late. I told her we had to leave at two
o’clock. But she wasn’t ready. I told her I had to leave because our
session is at three o’clock. But then she was so slow getting out of
the shower and then getting dressed. I kept telling her we had to go
but she didn’t listen. She kept making me wait. So she made me
late today. I’m so angry that she doesn’t respect my time or listen to
me.
Th: Who made the decision to wait? [Point out to the patient her role.]
Pt: She did, because she was late. [Externalization.]
Th: Who made the decision to wait for her?
Pt: I did, but she wasn’t ready yet.
Th: You waited for her. So you made yourself late. But you blame her
for your decision to wait for her. And you blame her for your
decision to make yourself late. Do you see what I mean? [Point out
the externalization.]
Pt: But she made me late! [Externalization. Psychodiagnosis: the
patient cannot differentiate the stimulus (daughter’s lateness) from
her defense (self-punishment through choosing to be late).]
Th: That’s not true. [Differentiate reality from fantasy, her actions from
her daughter’s actions, and her responsibility from her daughter’s.]
She chose to be late. Then you had two options: you could choose
to leave on time by yourself or choose to be late with her. You
chose to be late with her. That was your choice. But then you blame
her for your choice.
Pt: But she wasn’t listening to me! [Externalization: the patient didn’t
listen to herself. She does not differentiate the stimulus (daughter
not listening to her) from her defense (not listening to herself).]
Th: Of course not, but that wasn’t the problem. The problem was that
you weren’t listening to yourself! If she doesn’t listen to you and
you don’t listen to you, then you have a problem. If she doesn’t
listen to you, but you listen to yourself anyway, you don’t have a
problem. It’s as if you were waiting for her to listen to you before
you were going to listen to yourself and leave. Do you see what I
mean? [Point out what she did (not listen to herself) and how she
projects that onto her daughter (“She doesn’t listen to me”).]
Pt: If I had just come on time, I would not have been stewing there for
twenty minutes. [Patient begins to realize the price of her defense.]
Th: Can we take a look at what happened? What did you feel when she
was delaying?
Pt: Anger.
Th: You felt angry. That makes you anxious. Then rather than just feel
the anger and go on your way, you punished yourself for being
angry by making yourself late and you punished yourself for being
angry by cheating yourself out of twenty minutes of your therapy
time. [Point out the triangle of conflict.] And then you blamed your
daughter for your choice to punish yourself. [Point out the
externalization.]
Pt: That certainly fits my pattern, doesn’t it? I hadn’t seen how I blamed
her for what I was doing to myself. [Patient now sees the defense.]
Externalization leads her to take a victim stance: she complains about
and blames others for what she did to herself. She raged at her daughter,
unable to see how she hurt herself. As long as she blames her daughter, her
rage will escalate. Whenever you see a victim stance, start looking for the
externalization that sustains it.
Defensive Anger Due to Denial of Responsibility
In this example, notice how the therapist helps the patient see how he
blames his partner for his choices. The therapist helps the patient see
elements of reality. Then the therapist helps the patient see the choices he
made that caused his suffering. As long as he does not see the choices he
made that caused his suffering, he will believe his partner caused his
suffering and be eternally angry with her for his choices.
Pt: I’m so furious with my girlfriend. She decided to take this teaching
job here, which will last another year, and I came along. But I hate
this city. I hate the people here. My job sucks, and there is no way
to find something better in my specialty here. I was yelling at her
last night about how much I hate this place. She just says that her
contract lasts another year, and then we can move. But I just resent
her so much for taking this job.
Th: Who decided to move with her? [Point out reality.]
Pt: I did.
Th: It was your choice, but you yell at her for what you chose.
Pt: But she was the one who wanted to move.
Th: And at that time you could have said you wouldn’t move. But you
chose to move here with her. That was your choice. And she is not
responsible for your choice. You are. But you try to have it both
ways. You chose to stay with her and you punish her for your
choice. You decided she was more important to you than where you
live. But now that you are here, you resent her for your choice.
As the patient recognizes how he projects the responsibility for his
choice onto his girlfriend, his rage drops rapidly. Once he admits his
destructive self-abandonment, we have an intrapsychic focus. We can focus
on his defense, not her move.
GUILT
Misunderstandings occur when we confuse healthy guilt with neurotic
guilt. (See Bergler 1959, 71–73.) Healthy guilt and neurotic guilt differ in
the following ways.
Subject matter: Healthy guilt is for what you did—you hurt someone.
Neurotic guilt is often displaced. A patient feels neurotic guilt over
forgetting someone’s name. In fact, she hates the guy. So she
punishes herself for the lesser crime.
Quantitative factor: The amount of healthy guilt corresponds to the
wrong deed you committed. Neurotic guilt corresponds to the need
for self-punishment.
Expiation: Normal guilt can be expiated by repairing the damage you
inflicted on the relationship. Neurotic guilt cannot be expiated
because it is how we punish ourselves.
Time limit: Normal guilt disappears because you repaired the damage
you caused. Neurotic guilt never disappears. The self-punishment
continues.
Self-limitation versus self-aggravation: Normal guilt is self-limiting
through reparation and compassion for self and others. Neurotic
guilt grows in intensity as the patient misuses more elements of
reality to torment herself with new “crimes.”
Exhaustibility: Normal guilt is a realistic response to a real deed and,
therefore, exhaustible. Neurotic guilt is an unrealistic form of selfpunishment, which is inexhaustible.
Battlefronts: Genuine guilt is for a real deed. Neurotic guilt is connected
to a substitute. A man feels guilt for criticizing a colleague in a
meeting, which is a substitute for the real deed over which he feels
guilt: convincing the boss to fire the colleague.
Type of guilt: Normal guilt is realistic. Neurotic guilt is an unrealistic
form of self-punishment.
Outcome: Normal guilt rises and then ends with reparation. Neurotic
guilt is forever.
THE STRUCTURE OF FEELING EXPERIENCE
Greenspan and Shanker (2006) proposed a hierarchy of feeling
capacities: (1) to attend to and regulate feelings; (2) to express, understand,
and signal with a wide range of feelings; and (3) to construct
representations and be able to differentiate them from reality. A patient who
cannot pay attention to her feelings and identify the needs they signal
cannot regulate or express them adaptively. If a patient cannot pay attention
to her anger when a boyfriend criticizes her, she will not be able to identify
her need to set a self-protective limit, nor express it. Unable to pay attention
to or identify her anger, she may unconsciously turn it onto herself, become
depressed, and suffer from “affect dysregulation.” Or she may project her
anger onto her boyfriend and then remain paralyzed by fear of him. Unable
to pay attention to the bodily experience of her feelings, her ability to
represent them is impaired. She cannot use her feelings as a source of
conscious information.
Feelings represent a continuum from nonawareness (the emotion is
simply acted out) to complete awareness (the feeling is experienced and
verbally labeled). Table 10.2 illustrates how patients represent their
feelings.
Table 10.2 Hierarchy of feeling states
Representational states Examples
Abstracted feeling states: Words have a
combined affective/cognitive meaning and
refer to specific differentiated feeling states.
Joy, anger, anxiety,
sadness, disgust, shame,
guilt
Expressions of global feelings “I feel awful.”
Verbalization of organized somatic feelings “My heart aches.”
Verbalization of disorganized somatic feelings “When she stares at me, it’s
as if my body explodes into
a thousand pieces.”
Verbalization of intention in behavioral terms “I want to push you.”
Verbalization of behavior “I grabbed her.”
Organized somatic description “My heart hurts.
Disorganized, fragmented, primitive somatic “My blood vessels were
pattern going to explode.”
Complex gestural communication Angry or loving facial
expressions
Direct discharge of behavior Hitting, biting, hugging,
holding
Simple gestural communication Smiles, nods, frowns
Source: Greenspan 1997, 230.
Feeling states can be categorized as prebehavioral, behavioral, and
verbal representations. Verbal representations of feeling can be behavioral
intentions, fragmented somatic states, organized somatic states, and
abstract, differentiated feeling states. The patient who represents his
feelings in disorganized somatic terms or in behavioral or gestural terms is
more likely to be impulsive. For instance, he may tell you he wants to hit
someone but not know the feeling he has: anger. Or he says he is angry but
cannot tolerate the experience of it in his body so he acts out instead. A
patient who represents his anger as a disorganized somatic state might say,
“I feel like I could explode into a thousand pieces.” But he won’t be able to
label his feeling as anger.
ASSESSMENT OF IMPULSIVITY
This hierarchy of affect symbolization (how we put feelings into words)
allows us to assess impulsivity in fragile patients. To assess, first ask if the
patient has impulsively acted out in the past. Second, assess the patient’s
affect tolerance, maturity of defenses, anxiety tolerance, and affect
symbolization.
Affect tolerance: Patients who have good impulse control can label and
tolerate the rise of the feeling without acting out. Patients with poor
impulse control cannot tolerate the experience of anger. Instead,
they try to get rid of it by moving their bodies, getting up out of the
chair, and raising their voices. They act out impulses to avoid the
internal experience of the feeling. Encourage them to tolerate the
feeling without resorting to discharge. Blocking discharge helps the
patient develop a higher tolerance of the rage, thereby reducing
impulsivity. When he wants to talk about and act out his impulse,
ask about the experience of anger in the body. The longer he can
tolerate his anger without acting it out, the greater his affect
tolerance. The lower the affect tolerance, the sooner he acts out.
Maturity of defenses: Patients with good impulse control use repressive
defenses that keep anger out of awareness. Patients with poor
impulse control use regressive defenses: acting out, discharge,
racing speech, and projection. They project their impulses or
superego onto others whom they imagine to be hostile. Then they
act out with the people on whom they project.
Anxiety tolerance: Patients who discharge their anxiety into the striated
muscles usually have good impulse control. However, patients
whose anxiety is discharged into cognitive/perceptual disruption
use projection more frequently.
Affect symbolization: Patients with good impulse control can label their
feeling of anger and describe how they experience the feeling and
impulse in their body. Patients with poor impulse control describe
their feeling as disorganized somatic states (“I feel like I want to
explode”) or as a behavioral intention (“I want to hit him”), after
which the patient, unable to tolerate the experience of the anger,
begins to punch the air with his fist. He does not just describe a
feeling; he enacts it. Some impulsive patients suffer from “trigger
language.” The word anger may trigger action in the patient rather
than reflection (Ekstein 1966). The therapist might say, “You seem
angry.” A reflective patient would respond, “You’re right. I do feel
angry.” An impulsive patient for whom language has a trigger
function will pound his fist and yell, “You’re goddamn right I’m
angry!”
FEELINGS AND SYMBOLIC FUNCTIONING
For feelings to become part of our symbolic world, we must separate
perception from action, which are not separated in young children and
impulsive adults. An impulsive adult feels an impulse and punches the wall
without delay. He cannot observe or pay attention to his feeling or think
about how best to channel it. Impulse becomes action without any
intervening awareness or attention to the feeling. Such patients are not
conscious of what they feel when they act. Unable to express verbally or to
think abstractly about their feelings, these patients remain in an action mode
(Greenspan and Shanker 2006, 467).
For instance, a patient who threatened people with knives in his group
home suddenly ran out of my office. Another person could say, “My legs
feel like I want to run out of the office.” Someone else with more awareness
could say, “I’m afraid of you.” And a patient with much higher capacity
could reflect, “I’m aware I’m angry with you for saying that. In the past I
felt like running away from you as if you were angry with me.”
Some might call the patient who ran out of my office impulsive. This
describes the quality of the symptom but not its cause. The patient cannot
observe or pay attention to his feeling (anger), anxiety, or defense
(projection). Unable to observe or pay attention to his feelings, he is not
conscious of them. Unable to differentiate me from his projection, he must
run away from me. His so-called impulse is not a feeling but a reaction to
the projection he placed on me. He did not run away from a therapist but
from a projection.
The second patient can observe his legs (the defensive action) but not
his feeling, anxiety, or the defense of projection. The third patient, who says
he is afraid of his therapist, can observe the result of his projection, but not
his act of projecting. Unaware of his anger and his projection of it, he
assumes he is afraid of the therapist. Since the last patient can see his
feeling (anger) and the defense of projection, he no longer feels the urge to
run away from a projection.
Each patient wanted to run away from a projection. The feeling seems
catastrophic in the first case because the patient cannot see his projection,
differentiate his therapist from his projection, or differentiate past
experience from the present. The loss of reality testing causes catastrophic
feelings.
To regulate emotions, activate the missing self-observing capacities. In
the first patient, we would separate the projection from the therapist,
differentiate past and present, mobilize the patient’s ability to observe and
pay attention to anxiety in his body, mobilize his ability to observe and pay
attention to the feeling triggering his anxiety, and mobilize his ability to see
causality—when he feels angry, he gets anxious and then projects his anger
and acts out toward his projections. Then his impulsivity drops because he
can differentiate the therapist from his projection.
When impulses result from projection, help the patient see the
projection and regain his reality testing before exploring the feeling. Help
impulsive patients who experience a fast rise of feeling to observe and pay
attention to the physical experience of the feeling in the body without
enacting it. These skills build the capacities for feeling tolerance, impulse
control, “the construction of internal representations, and higher levels of
consciousness” (Greenspan and Shanker 2006, 467).
When the patient can pay attention to and put those feelings into words,
the feelings no longer trigger unreflective action. He can represent them as
words, images, and fantasies that acquire many meanings. Rather than
suffer from “impulses” resulting from projections, he experiences feelings
triggered by real stimuli, which he can channel into effective action.
SUMMARY
So-called dysregulated affects are the result of dysregulating defenses.
The issue is not regulation of the dysregulated affect but helping the patient
see the defenses that create it, especially projection. Krystal (1974, 1975,
1988, 1998), in his studies of alexythemia, proposed that these patients
suffer from hyposymbolization, dedifferentiation, and affect regression.
Patients who ignore the physical experience of their feelings cannot label
them. If patients cannot differentiate the therapist from a projection, we will
have dedifferentiation and regression.
The term affect regression is a misnomer. Affects do not regress. The
patient’s regression in reality testing leads her to confuse the therapist with
her projection. Fearing her projection as if it were real, she is in a genuine
catastrophe. Patients suffering a flashback cannot differentiate the present
from the past, the therapist from an abuser. They relive rather than
remember the past. This regression in reality testing leads to catastrophic
affects.
Any feeling can be too much to bear if the patient has to bear it alone
without the support of another caring human being. Patients become
overwhelmed by defensive affects for that reason and others. Defensive
affects become overwhelming when there is a loss of reality testing—an
inability to differentiate a past trauma from current reality, a loss of reality
testing due to projection, a loss of reality testing due to loss of
differentiation between the observing ego and experiencing self, increasing
defensive affects to cover other feelings (e.g., weepiness to cover rage or
rage to cover grief), and increasing defensive affects to punish the patient
for an expression of rage (e.g., a rise in shame and self-attack). If the patient
is experiencing a feeling while in the presence of a projection, she will be
bearing her feeling alone and will become overwhelmed.
For the traumatized patient “every emotional experience resonates as if
it were the recurrence of the trauma” (Wurmser 2003, 226). We can tolerate
a feeling experienced as a memory in the past. “I remember feeling this way
when I was with my uncle Ed in Iowa.” The feeling rises and subsides
because the patient differentiates the past and present. When reliving a
trauma, feelings do not subside because the patient equates the present
feeling with the past trauma (Segal 1981). In his mind, he is with Uncle Ed.
All patients within the spectrum of fragility suffer from defensive
affects. Identify, clarify, and restructure the regressive defenses causing the
defensive affects. When the patient tolerates her genuine feelings without
using regressive defenses, she can bear an unlocking of the unconscious.
PART THREE
Helping the Highly Resistant Patient
I
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Superego Pathology
n part 1, we learned the basic principles of assessment applicable to all
patients. In part 2, we learned additional principles of assessment and
intervention for patients in the fragile spectrum. Now we will address
the principles and interventions for highly resistant patients.
These patients use a special group of defenses based on the enactment
of identifications within the superego. Since these defenses have a different
structure from the defenses discussed previously, they require a special set
of interventions designed to address the identifications on which these
defenses are based. Since these defenses occur on a spectrum of syntonicity,
they require a spectrum of interventions designed to help patients see them.
But before we look at those defenses, we will first examine the concept of
the superego.
A woman living with an abusive husband says she does not deserve
anything better in life. An adolescent girl claims she is proud of her ability
to cut her arms and starve herself. A young man fails a test in medical
school, feels enormous shame, and then commits suicide. An out-of-control
internal judge punishes these patients continuously. Why?
We have a conscience, a capacity for guilt, a moral sense of what is
right and wrong that gives meaning to our lives, an ideal image toward
which we strive, or an inner voice saying we should not do something. We
live according to internalized standards that guide our actions. They lead us
to approve of deeds consistent with our values, or disapprove if they are not
(S. Freud 1923/1961). When we have hurt someone, we feel guilt and reach
out to repair the damage we caused (Klein 1975a, 1975b). As a result, we
may feel self-love as a reward for living up to our internal ideals (Brenner
1955). These aspects of our inner life comprise the system “superego”
(Barnett 2007).
Superego originally referred to the conscience (S. Freud 1923/1961c;
Roth 2001), the ego ideal (S. Freud 1923/1961c), the pursuit of suffering
(Bergler 1948, 1952, 1961; S. Freud 1923/1961c), and a “grade” within the
ego (S. Freud 1923/1961c; 1940/1963). Later thinkers defined superego as
stored up-aggression—daimonium (Bergler 1952) and a collection of
identifications (Britton 2003; Kernberg 1975). Others have linked the
concept of the superego to our capacity for guilt (Klein 1975a, 1975b) and
to our drive to know the truth (Grotstein 2004, 2010; Reiner 2010). For the
sake of clinical clarity, we will define the pathological superego as a
collection of identifications that patients can enact as defenses. All later
references to the superego will be to the pathological superego.
HOW IDENTIFICATIONS ARE FORMED
Children learn by imitating others and form these memories in implicit
memory (Schore 1991). These memories serve an adaptive purpose. Each
time the child encounters a given person, nonconscious memory tells her
what to anticipate and how to respond adaptively (Hartmann 1964). These
memories, enacted frequently enough as defenses, become habits that form
our character structure (S. Freud 1917/1961a; Grigsby and Stevens 2000).
As implicit memories, they continue to guide behavior nonconsciously
during adulthood (Hassin et al. 2006).
We imitate others unconsciously, but we may enlist identifications for
the purpose of defense. We may identify with others to avoid complex
feelings related to loss (Davanloo 1990, 2000; S. Freud 1917/1961a;
1940/1963). A man wears his father’s clothes after his father’s death. We
may identify with a dangerous person to become the source of danger so
that the dangerous caretaker is still someone we can have hope in (Fairbairn
1954; Guntrip 1968). For instance, a little boy with a violent father claims
that he, the boy, is dangerous. Meanwhile, he views his father as kind and
not so dangerous. We may identify with others to ward off feelings of guilt
over destructive wishes toward the caretaker (Klein 1975a, 1975b). These
are not conscious thoughts. These are just conscious descriptions of tacit
behaviors. But the main reason we develop these identifications? To avoid
sharing feelings or impulses that could jeopardize a relationship we need for
survival. We hide the feeling we have and identify with the person we are
with.
WHY IDENTIFICATIONS ARE FORMED
When a parent damages the bond with his or her child, the child feels
reactive rage (Benjamin 1993; Bowlby 1969, 1973, 1980). However,
expressing this rage could further damage the bond or provoke additional
retaliation. Unfortunately, the caretakers may provoke the child’s rage many
times, arousing guilt over his impulses (A. Freud 1936; Klein 1975b;
Schore 1994). For the small child, a fantasy can trigger as much guilt as a
deed (Klein 1975a, 1975b).
The child protects his mother by turning rage onto himself. “I don’t feel
guilty over the rage toward my mother. I become her and punish myself for
having been enraged.” Through this “gift of love” he rejects his inner life to
keep his bond with her (Benjamin 1993).
Patients who turn rage on themselves usually suffered from a
traumatized bond in early life. This triggered powerful unconscious,
primitive murderous rage toward the loved one who damaged the bond, as
well as guilt over that rage. In response to these mixed feelings, the child’s
guilt often triggers a pattern of unconscious self-punishment and selfsabotage (Davanloo 1990; Klein 1975a, 1975b). These patients punish
themselves eternally for their rageful impulses toward early caretakers.
It may seem bizarre to attribute murderous impulses to small children,
yet their play constantly reveals themes of adults being killed, eaten, or
jailed and then brought back to life. Children are helpless with little
autonomy under the power of others. What is worse, the child usually needs
help from the person causing the rage. Unable to rely on his parent for help
with his feelings, he relies on his defenses instead, especially the defense of
identifying with the parent.
When enacting these identifications becomes automatic and habitual,
adult patients deprive, hurt, and punish themselves or others. What was an
occasional defense becomes a habitual pattern of defense use that
chronically creates symptoms. We must help these patients see and turn
against defenses based on identifications with aggressors.
HOW IDENTIFICATIONS ARE EXPRESSED AS
DEFENSES
The child can enact an identification in one of three ways. For instance,
a child with a critical mother may identify with her mother and criticize
herself when she is angry. She may identify with her mother and criticize
her little sister’s anger. Or she may project and believe other people will
criticize her for being angry. Thus, she can ward off her anger by enacting
the identification with her mother in three different ways. She can do to
herself what her mother did to her. She can do to others what her mother did
to her. Or she can fear that others will do to her what her mother did to her.
When the adult patient does to herself what her mother did to her, we
call this a character defense. When she does to the therapist what was done
to her, we call it a transference resistance. When she imagines that the
therapist will do to her what her mother did to her, we call it projection of
the superego or a transference of defense (A. Freud 1936).
IDENTIFICATION AS A PROBLEM OF SELF-OBSERVING
CAPACITY
The child wards off feelings toward aggressors by identifying with the
aggressors. This preserves a jeopardized attachment. These defenses occur
when the child is immature and cannot reliably distinguish between reality
and fantasy. These identifications also occur when the child’s mind cannot
differentiate reality from projections she receives. The child who criticizes
herself like her mother did, does not see that she attacks herself. She
believes mother’s criticism is simply true.
When adult patients attack themselves, they also show a transient loss in
symbolic thinking. They think they are innately unlovable, bad, or evil.
Symbolic equation (Segal 1981) occurs when patients cannot distinguish
reality (the therapist) from fantasy (the projection). In the group of defenses
we examine here, the patient cannot distinguish reality (herself) from
fantasy (the self-attack). Naturally, if the little girl equates reality and
fantasy (“I am bad”), mother remains good, and the girl has successfully
warded off her rage (Klein 1975a, 1975b; Segal 1981; Winnicott 1965).
Self-attack begins early in life when the child believes if something bad
happens, she must be bad (Ferenczi 1950; Piaget 1970). She understands
herself and others through concrete operational thought (Piaget 1970).
Adults using self-attack often regress to concrete operational thought
(Leahy 2001).
The patient who believes she is bad needs help to see (Gray 2005) and
differentiate herself from self-attacking defenses. S. Freud (1940/1963, 180)
called this the “slow demolition of the hostile superego.”
Identifications: Why the Superego Becomes So Harsh
Since the superego is a concept, it cannot act. Hence, we define the
superego as a collection of pathological identifications (Britton 2003;
Kernberg 1975) that patients enact as defenses (A. Freud 1936).
Harsh identifications are not always accurate photographs of parents.
Their harshness stems from two sources:
Reality: The parents were harsh.
Misperceptions: the child views the parents through neurocognitive
deficits, an immature brain, or projections.
The child who has harsh parents judges himself harshly. In contrast, a
child with neurocognitive deficits, such as sensory integration problems,
may experience his mother’s attempt to dress him as a painful attack.
Because he misperceives her, he may identify with a harsh, attacking
mother. A normal child, frustrated by his mother, will feel rage, but he may
project his rage onto her and say, “Mom is angry and mean.” Then he
identifies with this distorted image of a “depriving” mother. For instance, an
angry four-year-old boy may think his mother rejects him while she cares
for his younger siblings. She is not rejecting him. She is, however, less
available. But he views her through the lens of his anger. Thus,
identifications with an aggressor (A. Freud in Sandler and A. Freud 1985,
404) can be based on reality or misperceptions or both.
How Identifications Are Structured
Patients’ identifications with aggressors (S. Freud 1940/1963) manifest
as unconscious, primitive defenses (Gill 1963, 144). Suppose a patient had a
critical mother. She will form a memory not just of her mother but of the
relationship with her mother. This memory is understood as an object
relation (Kernberg 1975): a memory of herself (self-presentation), her
critical mother (object-representation), and the affect between them (e.g.,
anger). Thus, any time a feeling rises in therapy, that feeling is connected to
a memory of a past relationship (a criticizing mother and a criticized child).
When anger arises, the highly resistant patient enacts that memory in the
form of a defense: self-criticism, criticizing someone else, or projecting that
someone wants to criticize her.
Let’s suppose the patient had a judgmental father. In therapy, the patient
can enact an identification with the father who judged her in three ways:
She judges herself (character defense) as her father judged her.
She judges you (transference resistance).
She imagines that you judge her (projection of the superego).
When she treats herself as her father did in the past, this is a character
defense (Kernberg 1984; Reich 1933): “I’m such an idiot.” In the
transference resistance, she treats others as her father treated her (Kernberg
1984; Reich 1933): “You are such an idiot!” In the paranoid solution, she
imagines others will judge her as her father did in the past: “Everyone
thinks I’m an idiot.” Identified with the child, she regards you as identical
with her father: “You, the therapist, treat me like an idiot.” This is
projection of the superego, or a transference of defense (A. Freud 1936).
To summarize, patients can enact identifications with aggressors in three
ways: character defense, transference resistance, and projection of the
superego. Table 11.1 illustrates these patterns within the spectrum of
superego pathology (Kernberg 1975).
Table 11.1 Superego pathology
Early relationship: “Dad judges me.”
These defenses occur on a spectrum of reality testing ranging from a
patient who wonders if you are critical to a patient who believes you want
to kill him. Another patient may view his self-attack (symbol) as if it is
correct (reality). “I am evil.” This is symbolic equation (Segal 1957). He
may also view his projection (symbol) as if it is true (reality). “You are evil
and don’t care about me.” To establish reality testing and an internal focus,
differentiate reality (the patient or other people) from judgments.
The capacity to tolerate internal conflict also exists on a spectrum. A
relatively healthy patient tolerates internal conflict: “I have angry feelings
and criticize myself for having them.” The less healthy patient admits he is
angry, but projects his internal judgment onto others. “They don’t like me.”
A less healthy patient denies his anger, projecting it onto others whom he
judges. The borderline patient alternates: at one moment, he believes you
judge him; the next moment he judges you. Meanwhile, he constantly
judges himself.
INTERNAL STANDARDS
Defenses based on pathological identifications create symptoms known
as superego pathology. Ideally, we pursue our desires while living in accord
with values that give meaning to our lives. Unfortunately, however, some
patients misuse values in the service of self-punishment. The patient who
fails to live up to standards may
Judge herself for failing to live up to her standards, thereby suffering
from chronic self-punishment.
Project her inner judge onto others, believing they criticize her. She
may even provoke them to punish her.
Judge others rather than herself.
Escape judgment by claiming to be the same as her ideal or by
having immoral standards.
The Ego Ideal: Who We Are versus Who We Wish We Were
None of us is the same as we wish we were (the ego ideal) (ChasseguetSmirgel 2003). Being human, we will never incarnate our ideals. They are
like the North Star, providing a framework of meaning: what we value and
aim for.
A patient who cannot bear not being the same as his ideal, handles this
conflict in one of four ways:
He hates himself. “I’m not the same as my ideal, but I can be loyal to
it by hating myself.”
He hates and devalues ideals (or respected people) rather than hate
himself for having failed to live up to them. “Since I’ve learned about
some of her character flaws, now I know that Mother Teresa was just
a hypocrite.” Depression results because his life lacks meaning
without ideals.
He claims to be his ideal, denying reality. Living this lie, he fears
others will expose him as a fraud. To ward off his fear, he demands
that his followers admire him as if he were the ideal or face
expulsion from the group. Reality threatens his denial. At the same
time, he devalues others for failing to be ideal. So cults become
paranoid to keep reality from threatening the leader’s denial.
He idealizes someone who claims to be ideal. He follows the
idealized person’s instructions with the hope of one day becoming
the ideal himself. He shifts his attention away from who he is to who
he wishes he were. By doing so, he loses sight of the reality of his
being. In these forms we recognize how narcissism can be a defense
against harsh self-judgment.
When we violate our standards, we can face our guilt and engage in
reparation. We can forgive ourselves as inevitably flawed humans who will
never be perfect. A patient with superego pathology believes she deserves
everlasting suffering, punishment, and perhaps even a death penalty,
suicide.
Healthy or Unhealthy?
A healthy patient sees reality. An unhealthy patient views herself
through the filter of harsh judgment, which substitutes for realistic
appraisal. She sees only those parts of herself consistent with her selfattack, ignoring her strengths and abilities. She insists that she (a flawed
human being) should become ideal. She cannot distinguish fantasy (ideals)
from reality. The patient’s ideal may enact her identification with an
aggressor. Suppose a parent criticized her for not being perfect. Now she
attacks herself through perfectionism, directing rage toward herself rather
than toward her critical father.
A healthy patient considers herself to be worthy of constant acceptance
and guidance. She regards her value as unconditional given her innate worth
as a human being. The patient who identified with an aggressor does not
accept herself. She believes she has no intrinsic worth. She believes she
must be perfect to become worthy of love.
The healthy patient pays attention to her inner life, trusting it to guide
her. The unhealthy patient, identified with an aggressor, ignores her inner
life, trusting her self-doubt for direction.
In summary, in response to experienced aggression by others, the child
identifies with aggressive caretakers. These identifications, enacted as
character defenses and transferences, create her presenting problems,
perpetuating her suffering. Thus, we must help the patient see and turn
against those character defenses and transferences to reach the buried mixed
feelings (Davanloo 1990, 2000; S. Freud 1940/1963; Gray 2005).
LEVELS OF SUPEREGO PATHOLOGY
Since superego pathology exists on a continuum we must assess a
variety of patient capacities. Can the patient bear her guilt or does she
project that others judge her? Does her internal judgment help guide her to
better action or has it become a means to torment or even kill her? When
she projects her internal judgment onto others, can she see that or has she
lost her reality testing? The following section will show criteria for four
levels of superego pathology.
Healthy: The patient feels guilt, remorse, and concern for others.
Conflict is intrapsychic. She loves herself and her ideals. She
accepts herself while living a life based on her values.
Neurotic: The patient feels guilt, remorse, and concern for others, but
her defenses of self-punishment, self-shaming, and self-attack lead
to depression and anxiety. She misuses ideals to attack herself.
Rather than tolerate her internal experience of guilt, sometimes she
believes it is due to criticism by others.
Borderline: The patient has trouble bearing her guilt, remorse, or selfconcern due to severe self-attack. She projects her superego onto
others and becomes afraid of their judgment (“Other people are
trying to make me feel guilty.”) Alternatively, she projects her
forbidden impulses onto others and judges them. She no longer
experiences her conflicts intrapsychically, but interpersonally.
Projection leads her to become paranoid, fearing punishment from
others, or she denies feeling guilty to avoid severe self-punishment.
To avoid the severe self-attack, she uses denial and splitting. She
may hold high values but act against them without being troubled
by the contradiction between her values and her actions. When she
falls short of her ideal, her self-devaluation creates severe mood
swings. In response, she may abandon the pursuit of ideals and
devalue them and anyone who has them, living a life without
meaning.
The patient enacts pathological identifications as character traits
and tolerates them. For instance, a borderline patient slapped
himself during the session when he said something he regarded as
stupid. Since his father called him names and slapped him, the
patient regarded hitting himself in session as normal.
The borderline patient transiently loses sight of the difference
between the reality of the therapist and the projections she places on
him.
Psychotic: This patient projects primitive, aggressive images onto
others. She lives in constant fear because she loses sight of the
difference between other people and her projections. She suffers
from a severe loss of reality testing (Meissner 1984; Kernberg
1975).
Psychodiagnosis of Superego Pathology
Defenses that enact identifications sabotage therapy. They function as
resistances to the experience of feelings and the emotional closeness that
results from sharing them. They create symptoms of depression, anxiety,
self-destructiveness, self-reproach, impoverishment of the personality, and
sterile relationships.
Below we examine these defenses and offer interventions for them.
Type One: Judging Oneself
The patient can judge herself as she was judged. She may experience
this as a critical voice in her mind or a critical thought she has about herself
or it can take the form of conscious self-hatred. The following vignettes
show this spectrum of self-judgment from someone with a relatively healthy
conscience to someone who suffers from severe self-hatred.
Experiencing one’s superego as critical
Some patients are aware of their self-criticism, as if it is an internal
irrational voice.
Pt: I told Bill I didn’t want him to take that job because we would have
to move. I would have to give up my job. The kids would have to
lose all their friends here. But I’ve been feeling like I shouldn’t
have done that, like it was selfish of me to say that.
Th: It’s as if a policeman [superego] comes into the room to attack you
as soon as you stand up for what you want. It’s as if it’s against the
law to do that. [Differentiate the patient from her internal critical
voice by showing her how she condemns herself after asserting
herself.]
Identification with a pathological introject
Self-attack occurs when the patient attacks herself as someone attacked
her in the past.
Self-attack as a defense against the experience of rage: Self-attack is
always a defense. For instance, a woman reported that a teenage
daughter criticized her unfairly.
Pt: I’m a terrible mother. I don’t know why you keep working with me.
I’m not getting any better. Don’t you think the clinic will finally
decide I shouldn’t be in therapy because it’s taking too long?
[Defense: self-attack.]
Th: What is the feeling you have toward your daughter for criticizing
you like that?
Pt: I think I’m a terrible mother. [Defense: self-attack.]
Th: That describes you, not your feeling toward your daughter. Do you
notice how this mechanism in your mind is criticizing you right
now? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: But I am a terrible mother. [Defense: self-attack.]
Th: Do you notice how this mechanism in your mind is criticizing you
right now?
Pt: Yes, but I think it is right. [Now she sees the defense, but it is
syntonic.]
Th: This mechanism that is criticizing you right now—do you think it
might be hurting you? Do you think it might be getting you down?
[Point out causality: the defense hurts her.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: You think this critical mechanism might be getting you down. Do
you think it might be making you depressed?
Pt: Oh, definitely. [Her anxiety drops as she steps back and observes the
defense.]
Th: If we put that critical mechanism off to the side, could we shift
perspectives for a moment and see what the feeling is toward your
daughter instead?
Pt: Okay.
Th: You mentioned that you have been trying hard, and your daughter
criticized you in a way that was unfair. Let’s see what the feeling is
toward your daughter for being unfair to you.
Pt: I didn’t like it. [Defense: intellectualization.]
Th: What’s the feeling toward her for doing that?
Pt: Anger?
Th: You felt angry toward her for doing that.
The patient turns the rage on herself through self-attack, becoming
depressed. Her self-esteem plummets because condemnation from her
internal world replaces realistic appraisal from the external world (Jacobson
1971, 90). Whenever patients report low self-esteem, look for the defenses
creating it.
Help the patient pay attention to the function, not the content, of the
judgment. Point out how a critical voice in her mind attacks her. Once she
can see the defense of self-attack, focus on the underlying feelings. The
following are common forms of self-attack:
• “I am bad, stupid, a failure, ugly, fat, and no good.”
• “I am not good enough.”
• “I will never be able to …”
• “I don’t deserve …”
• “I shouldn’t feel …”
Each of these statements guarantees the patient’s suffering will
continue, defends against feeling, and rejects the patient and her feelings.
Self-attack creates depression and low self-esteem. Self-esteem is like a tree
that she can nurture or chop down with little cuts of self-attack.
In the following example, the patient suffered from a psychotic
depression, delusions of persecution, and auditory hallucinations. She had
suffered from physical and sexual abuse as a child. Because her ability to
observe and think are so impaired at this stage, I address her self-attack in a
different way.
Pt: I’m terrible. God does not love me. I know he could not love me.
Otherwise, I would not have had all these traumas. I had these
traumas because I am bad. [Her self-attack is syntonic. She cannot
see how she treats herself. She does not see this defense against her
rage toward the people who hurt her. For her, her badness is a fact,
not a description. She equates herself with this symbol of badness.]
Th: Since I haven’t cured you yet, I must be bad too. How should I
punish myself, do you think? [Present a mirror to her. Enact her
pattern of self-attack so she can see it.]
Pt: [Surprise and a smile.] What? Oh, Dr. Jon, you should not punish
yourself. [She does not yet see her self-attack.]
Th: I should have cured you by now, and the fact that I haven’t cured
you yet means I am bad. And since I am bad, I deserve to be
punished. How do you think I should punish myself? [Mirror the
pathological logic her punitive mother used on the patient, which
the patient just used on herself.]
Pt: [Laughs.] Oh, you are funny. You can’t help it that you haven’t
cured me yet. I am much better now.
Th: But you still aren’t cured. And that means I am bad. And since I’m
bad, I deserve to punish myself. How should I punish myself, do
you think? [Mirror the punitive logic of her superego.]
Pt: [Laughs.] Now I see. You are doing to yourself what I have been
doing to me. [Now she sees how she has punished herself.]
Th: You could punish yourself, and I could punish myself, and then we
could suffer together. [Mirror the relationship she had with her
mother.]
Pt: [Laughs.] Oh, that would be horrible. Do you think I am not bad?
Th: No, I don’t think you are bad. I think you are mad! I think you are
really angry at the people who caused those traumas. [Point out the
rage she warded off through self-attack.]
Pt: Oh, you think I turn the anger on me rather than feel it toward my
mother? [Now her awareness is much higher.]
Th: Do you think so?
Pt: Yes.
Th: Shall we take a look at that anger toward your mother, so you don’t
have to turn it on yourself instead? [Mobilize her to the therapeutic
task.]
Self-attack as a defense against the experience of guilt: Self-attack is
a defense that wards off feelings. Sometimes the patient can use this
defense to direct rage against himself rather than toward someone
else. Here we see how the patient can use self-attack to ward off his
genuine guilt over hurting someone else.
Pt: I feel so terrible about the way I talked to Jane last night. I’m such a
terrible person.
Th: What happened?
Pt: I told her I don’t want to make love to her so often because I find her
too fat. I told her I think she is ugly. She cried and cried. Don’t you
think that was just terrible of me? [He invites the therapist to be his
superego so he can feel judged by me rather than by his own
conscience.]
Th: Do you? [Block the projection.]
Pt: I do. I think I was perfectly awful to her.
Th: How did you make it up to her?
Pt: What?
Th: You said you think you were awful to her. So I’m wondering how
you made it up to her?
Pt: I didn’t.
Th: [Silence.]
Pt: Are you thinking I should have? [Projection onto the therapist.]
Th: Given that you think you were perfectly awful to her, only you can
know whether you want to make it up to her or not. [Block his
projection.] That may not be something you need to repair.
Pt: I hadn’t thought about that. I just figured if I told her I felt terrible,
that would be enough. [He attacks himself rather than reach out to
her.]
Th: You thought if you attacked yourself, that would be enough.
Pt: It’s true. I didn’t actually tell her I was sorry.
Th: It’s as if your self-attack was a substitute for apologizing to her.
Pt: I didn’t come back to her afterward about it.
Th: In a way, attacking yourself became a substitute for reaching out to
her. Was this self-attack a way to avoid facing your guilt, reaching
out to her, and repairing the damage? [Point out the function of the
defense.]
Pt: I think that’s the same thing I did with Paula.
This patient uses self-attack to avoid facing his guilt. Always
differentiate self-punishment (narcissistic self-absorption) from healthy
guilt (relational reparation). When patients fail to apologize and engage in
reparation, their so-called guilty feelings have a defensive function.
Self-attack as a defense against the experience of pride: A patient
reports that she won a baking contest at her church but puts herself
down to avoid the envy of her friends and her pleasure in defeating
them.
Self-attack in response to tensions between the ego and the ego
ideal: Patients may attack themselves to ward off grief when they
fail to live up to their ideals.
Pt: I should have been able to get that job. I must have done something
wrong. [Here the patient is saying to herself: “I should be the same
as my ideal. Since I am not, I must torment myself by searching for
the answer so next time I can incarnate that ideal.”]
A patient may suffer mood swings, feeling excited when she
momentarily appears to be ideal. Then she becomes severely depressed
when she fails. Another patient punishes herself for failing to be like
someone she knows. She loves an ideal image, the person whom she
idealizes, but detests the reality of her essence. She condemns herself for
not being ideal. By comparing herself with a fantasy image, she becomes
blind to the truth of her own experience. She relates to a belief (“I should be
like someone else”) rather than reality.
Character defense—identification with a pathological introject enacted
habitually (see chapter 12 for more examples)
The patient wards off anger toward earlier aggressive figures by treating
herself aggressively the ways those figures did. She does to herself what
others did to her.
Pt: [Talks rapidly.]
Th: Do you notice how you talk rapidly right now? [Defense
identification.]
Pt: Yes, I always do that.
Th: That’s often a way of talking over your anxiety and feelings. If we
slow down for a moment, are you aware of feeling anxious right
now here with me? [Address the character defense: she ignores
herself, enacting an identification with someone who ignored her
feelings.]
Pt: I hadn’t thought of that before.
Th: You hadn’t thought about how you might be talking quickly over
your feelings and anxiety. Are you aware of feeling anxious right
now?
Pt: It’s no big deal. [Patient talks quickly again. Character defense of
self-dismissal.]
Th: You say it’s no big deal that you are anxious. Do you notice how
you dismiss your anxiety right now as if it is no big deal? [Implicit
description of the identification: an object relation of an ignoring
mother and ignored child.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: When you dismiss your anxiety as no big deal, is that a caring way
to treat yourself or might it be a dismissive way to treat yourself?
[Help the patient see the cruelty of ignoring her feelings.]
Pt: I guess it’s dismissive. I just hadn’t thought about it before.
Th: That’s why it’s important for us to think about it now. So you see
that it is dismissive to call your anxiety no big deal. Has it been a
habit to ignore your feelings and anxiety by talking over them?
Pt: I do talk fast all the time. That’s true, and I don’t usually stop to
notice if I’m anxious or not.
Th: You talk over your anxiety rather than pay attention to it. If you
ignore your anxiety, it just—
Pt: Escalates.
Th: Would it make sense to pay attention to this anxiety so you could
get a handle on it? Otherwise, if you keep ignoring it, it could get
worse. [Invite the patient to turn against the defense and pay
attention to her feelings instead.]
Pt: That makes sense. [The patient now observes the price of the
defenses.]
Th: As we begin to pay attention to your feelings and anxiety, are you
worth this attention in your opinion? [Mobilize the unconscious
therapeutic alliance.]
Pt: [Begins to tear up. Rise of guilt and grief over past self-neglect as
she turns against the defense.]
Th: Some painful feeling comes up.
Pt: I’m feeling some pain in my chest.
Th: Some painful feeling comes up as you make this choice to pay
attention to your anxiety instead of ignore it.
Each time we help the patient see a character defense and turn against
that identification, we have deactivated part of the pathological superego.
She must see and turn against these identifications before we explore rage
toward her parents. Otherwise, she will identify with them in session and
turn the rage back onto herself. This is especially true for depressed
patients.
Complete identification with the pathological superego
This type of patient consciously pursues self-defeat, delighting in selfdestructiveness as an ideal (Kernberg 1975, 121). She destroys herself to
triumph over a therapist she envies (Klein 1975b). A chronically depressed
woman presented for a consultation because she was stalemated in a
twenty-year-long therapy. She had responded minimally to treatment and
not at all to medications. In the session, she quickly became defiant,
projecting her healthy desires onto the consultant, whom she could oppose.
The following vignette occurred two hours into the interview.
Th: Do you notice how you deaden your emotions?
Pt: I want to be dead. [Said defiantly.]
Th: Obviously, if that’s what you want, it can be easily arranged. As you
know, neither I nor your therapist can stop you from killing
yourself if that’s what you want. [Deactivate the omnipotent
transference: she believes I can keep her alive if she wants to kill
herself.]
Pt: That’s true.
Th: If you want to deaden your emotions and go through life as an
emotionally dead woman, you can do that too. Obviously, if going
through life as an emotionally dead woman is helpful to you, you
have an obligation to deaden yourself. [Mirror the pathological
superego, which says, “Deadening yourself will help you.” Help
the patient see rather than identify with the pathological superego
by mirroring it.] But then, as long as you deaden your emotions,
you’ll have a dead therapy. And you can continue to have a dead
therapy for another twenty years if you think that would be helpful
to you. [Mirror the pathological superego.] But then, neither I, your
therapist, nor anyone else would be able to help you. [Point out the
destructive impact result of identifying with her pathological
superego.] Why do that to yourself ?
Pt: [Begins to cry.] I guess I’ve f—ed up major big time. [She begins to
feel grief and guilt over how she has hurt and deprived herself.]
In this example, I deactivated the patient’s identification (Ten Have de
Labije 2001, 2005, 2006, 2009a). Her defiance (the character trait) enacted
a pathological identification. She invited me to speak for her healthy
strivings while she opposed them. She gained “a pathological freedom from
the superego by identifying with it” (Kernberg 1975, 123). By refusing to
join me in the therapeutic task, she hoped to ensure its defeat. By
deactivating her identification, I helped her change.
At mild levels of superego pathology, the patient suffers from internal
conflict, criticizing herself for forbidden wishes and feelings. At severe
levels of superego pathology, the patient avoids internal conflict by
projecting healthy wishes or her pathological superego. She can project her
healthy strivings onto the therapist, so the therapist becomes responsible for
the therapy’s progress. She can project her rageful impulses onto others,
fearing their attacks. Or she can project her loving impulses onto others,
fearing they will violate her boundaries.
Type Two: Judging Others
The patient can enact the identification by judging others as he was
judged. This is a manic defense against guilt: “I don’t suffer from a
superego! I am a superego to others.” Like the boss who said, “I don’t have
ulcers. I give them!”
Being a superego to others
This type of patient comes across as bossy, officious, and superior. He
projects his impulses onto others whom he punishes. He judges others
quietly to avoid judging himself. At severe levels of superego pathology,
the patient no longer complains privately; he judges people in person. When
you point out his impulses, he (to avoid his guilt) may claim that you are
judging him. Then he becomes angry at, or fearful of, the supposedly
judging therapist.
In the following example, the patient, unfaithful to his wife, believes his
girlfriend is unfaithful to him. Rather than experience guilt over betraying
his wife, he punishes his girlfriend for his deed.
Pt: I called her (the girlfriend) five times in an hour, and she didn’t pick
up. I really got frantic that she was going out with someone else. I
got so enraged I couldn’t stand it.
Th: You were afraid she was betraying you.
Pt: Yes.
Th: Isn’t it interesting that you accuse her of what you are doing to your
wife? [Point out the projection.]
Pt: What?
Th: Isn’t it interesting that you accuse your girlfriend of doing to you
what you are doing to your wife?
Pt: I hadn’t thought of that.
Th: That you condemn her for what you have done. [Point out how he
judges her.]
Pt: [Becomes anxious.] Are you saying I should condemn myself? [He
tries to make the therapist into a judge, whom he can oppose and
argue with.]
Th: Only you can know whether you should condemn what you did or
not. [Block the projection.]
Pt: I see what you’re saying. I accuse her of doing what I did to my
wife. [He can see the projection. Next, help him face his guilt
rather than ask his girlfriend to bear it for him.]
Sometimes, when patients enact the pathological superego (“You are not
helpful”), therapists assume they have done something wrong. They feel
bad and apologize to the patient. Remember: the patient accuses the
therapist, just as his superego accuses him. If you find yourself worrying
about his criticism, pause and reflect. Notice your fear of his criticism and
its content. Now you know how he criticizes himself.
In the next example, a patient suffering from borderline personality
disorder alternately punishes himself or the therapist. Notice how the
therapist addresses this particular defense in a noninterpretive fashion.
Pt: [His voice is on the verge of yelling.] That is the most stupid thing I
have ever heard. Where did you get that, from a book? Don’t you
have anything useful to say? Every time I’m hearing this worthless
stuff from you, and it doesn’t help. I’m not getting any better. I
keep coming and nothing changes. All I hear is this worthless,
stupid crap that doesn’t help. What do you have to say for yourself?
[The patient attacks me, letting me know how he attacks himself. An
interpretation would trigger another attack. So I speak from within
the role of the attacked person.]
Th: Well, much of what you say is true. A lot of what I say is off target.
Sometimes it’s stupid. Sometimes what I say is useless and doesn’t
help. I can’t argue with that. All I can hope is that what I say is
good enough, enough of the time, that, in the end, we can have a
good result. [The therapist’s steadiness shows that he survived a
devaluing attack by the patient without attacking in turn and
without collapsing into depression as the patient usually does.]
Pt: [Relaxes into his chair.] Gosh. I wish I could say that.
Transference resistance: enactment of a past relationship
Moderately resistant patients use defenses to resist feelings. In contrast,
highly resistant patients enact a past relationship (the transference) to resist
feelings, hence, the term transference resistance. (See chapter 13, on
transference resistance.) In the transference resistance, the patient often
treats the therapist as his parents treated him.
Type Three: Projection of the Judge
To avoid his internal judgment, the patient may project and imagine that
the therapist judges him. This projection can range from a mild thought the
patient has about the therapist to a complete conviction hat the therapist
judges him. The following examples will exhibit this spectrum of reality
testing.
Projection onto others of an integrated conscience
When patients have excellent reality testing, they are aware of their
projection. And what they project is usually a healthy integrated conscience
—that is, a conscience they can acknowledge as their own which has
reasonable judgments.
Pt: You probably don’t think this is a good idea.
Th: I think that’s your conscience talking (Blackman 2004).
In the next example, the patient needs more help to see how she projects
her inner judge onto others.
Pt: I don’t think my staff will like it if I give myself a raise but not
them. [Defense: projection.]
Th: Who is having that thought? [Draw attention to the location of the
patient’s thought, so she can more easily see her projection.]
Pt: I am.
Th: In fact, you won’t like yourself if you give yourself a raise, but not
them. [Point out her internal judgment.]
Pt: That’s true.
Th: And maybe if you could accuse them of being your conscience
[point out how she projects her conscience], you could resent them
instead of what your own conscience is demanding of you.
Pt: That’s true because I am already judging myself, and they don’t
know about any of this yet.
Projection of a punitive superego
In the following example, the patient projects her inner judgment onto
her colleagues, believing they judge her. She must see her projection before
she can see her inner judgment. The patient believes her colleagues will
judge her for seeking medical leave to avoid an overseas assignment in a
dangerous area. Having lost many physical functions following an accident,
she lacks the strength necessary for the assignment.
Pt: I’m afraid, if the rest of my office finds out I am requesting medical
leave, they’ll really get angry with me. [Defense: projection of her
superego onto the office staff.]
Th: Are you having some doubts yourself ?
Pt: Well, I’m not sure my medical issues are really severe enough.
[Defense: denial.]
Th: What are they?
Pt: I’ve got fifty percent lung function, according to the doctors, and I
can’t carry more than twenty pounds, or else it will cause problems
with the surgery I had on my neck.
Th: You have fifty percent lung function, and you can’t carry more than
twenty pounds when you are required to carry how much?
Pt: Eighty pounds.
Th: You can carry twenty but are required to carry eighty. And you have
doubts about your ability to do this? [Point out the denial.]
Pt: I see what you mean. If I can carry only twenty, I can’t carry eighty.
Th: It sounds like you are criticizing yourself for taking medical leave
when, in fact, you qualify for it.
Pt: I feel I should be able to. [Defense: denial.]
Th: Even when you can’t. You criticize yourself for taking medical
leave and even try to ignore reality by asking yourself to do what
you cannot do. [Point out the denial.]
Pt: [Smiles a smile of recognition.] That’s true.
Th: It sounds like you are relieved not to have to go, but you punish
yourself for not going. You imagine they would be angry with you
and punish you, but it is you who is critical and punitive to
yourself. Do you see what I mean? [Point out her conflict: her wish
to take a leave, and the defenses of self-punishment and projecting
her superego onto others.]
Pt: But I think they would be angry. [Defense: projection of her
superego.]
Th: Some of them might be in the future, but right now we see that you
are criticizing yourself. You are punishing yourself. They aren’t
doing that. [Point out her self-punishment to deactivate her
projection that others want to punish her.]
Pt: That explains why I have been doing favors for other people.
Th: As if to ask for their forgiveness.
Pt: Yes—for not going on the assignment.
In the next example, a patient suffering from social anxiety fears women
will not find him attractive. This case illustrates how to help a patient see
his projection onto others through Socratic questioning. Notice how the
therapist then points out causality, showing the patient he is afraid of
projections he places on women. He is not afraid of the women themselves.
Pt: I’m going out tonight, but I don’t think they will find me attractive.
[Defense: projection.]
Th: Who has that thought? [The patient, although neurotic, fails to
distinguish his fantasy from reality. First distinguish his internal
judgment from his projection of it onto others.]
Pt: Me.
Th: Who had the thought yesterday that you were not attractive?
Pt: Me.
Th: And who had the thought the day before that you were overweight?
Pt: Me.
Th: So who has those self-critical thoughts?
Pt: Me.
Th: And who is accused of having those thoughts?
Pt: These women.
Th: Do you see how these are your self-critical thoughts and that you
put those thoughts onto women? [Determine if he can differentiate
his self-criticism from his projections.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: It is understandable you feel anxious when you date. You aren’t
afraid of the women. You are afraid of the critical mechanism that
you place on those women. [He does not fear women but the
projections he places on them. Differentiate these women from his
projections.]
Pt: I have those thoughts all the time. [But he does not distinguish his
thoughts (projections) from reality.]
Th: And when you put them on the women, it is no wonder you get
anxious. You have an internal judge. Then, when you put that judge
onto these women, you are afraid and uncomfortable. You’re not
afraid of the women. You’re afraid of that judgmental image you
place on those women. [Point out the conflict: closeness, anxiety,
project a judge on women, then fear the projections he places on
them. Differentiate women from his projections.]
Pt: That explains why I get so anxious before the date.
Th: You haven’t met the woman yet, but you are busy meeting these
images of a judge [projections] before the date. That would make
anyone anxious!
Pt: [Laughs.]
Externalization: projection of the superego—blaming and complaining
In externalization, the patient has a feeling, becomes anxious, and
punishes herself. Unable to see her defense of self-punishment, she blames
others or complains about how they punish her. Blaming them, she remains
blind to the ways she punishes herself. Blaming and complaining are results
of externalization. “I don’t punish myself, other people do. I can be angry at
them rather than face how I hurt myself.” Restructure externalization to
establish an internal perspective. (See chapter 9 on restructuring regressive
defenses.)
Projection of the pathological superego to avoid the experience of guilt
These patients avoid guilt by projecting the superego onto others. Then
they anticipate judgment from these supposed “judges,” whom they regard
as “unfair” or “critical.” Or they provoke others to judge them. “I knew you
wanted to punish me, and now I have the proof!”
A woman projects her superego onto her husband. Since she believes he
is an unfair judge, she believes he deserves all of her retaliatory rage. She
becomes blind to the fact she is hurting someone she loves and is killing off
the love he feels toward her. By projecting her superego, she avoids her
guilt, but at the price of damaging her marriage. She no longer sees
causality. Attacking her supposed judge, her rage (based on the projection)
blinds her to the fact that she is destroying her marriage.
In the following example, notice how the therapist blocks projections,
showing the patient how her defensive affects result from her projections,
not from her husband’s actions.
Husband: We had an argument the other night. And, since we were
ratcheting up, I said, “Let’s hold off until we see Jon on Monday.
Let’s talk about this then, and see if he can help us.”
Th to wife: What do you notice feeling?
Wife: I feel angry. I feel like he is telling you how he did so well, and
how I was out of control. I feel like he is misrepresenting me, as if
I’m “all bad,” and he’s “all good.” [She judges herself as “all
good” or “all bad,” but projects, claiming he judges her.]
Th: That may be what you heard, but that is not what he said. He said
you two had an argument, and he said he thought it would be good
if the two of you talked to me about it today. He did not portray
himself as “all good,” nor did he portray you as “all bad.” [Block
the projection. Point out reality.]
Wife: It feels that way. [Projection. She ignores what he says and pays
attention only to the feeling her projection creates.]
Th: Of course it feels that way. If you assume he is calling you “all
bad,” you will feel the feelings that go with that assumption. [Her
projection, not her husband, creates the feeling.] That’s why we
have to clarify that what you assumed is not the same as what he
actually said. [Distinguish the projection from her husband.]
Wife: I just feel you are not getting a realistic picture of what happens
between us. He is much worse to me than he acts in here. [Now she
judges her husband and invites me to judge him too.]
Th: I’m sure that both of you are able to sink to lower levels, but that is
not you. We know that at your top functioning, you both are
incredibly competent. But we see that under stress, your ability to
function drops precipitously. That’s why we have to look at the
feelings underneath that make you so anxious. [Mobilize the patient
to the therapeutic task: to face the feelings that lead her to punish
herself by projecting her punitive superego onto her husband.
Differentiate her as a person from the way she functions when
suffering from projection.]
Oscillating projections onto the therapist
Patients at a neurotic level of character pathology enact their
identifications by doing to themselves what others did to them, doing to the
therapist what was done to them, or thinking the therapist is going to do to
them what was done in the past.
Patients at a borderline level of character pathology do something
different. This type of patient may criticize himself, and then shift and
accuse you of criticizing him, then shift again and criticize himself. When
he enacts an identification, at one moment he acts out the role of the
criticized child, at the next moment the role of the criticizing parent
(Kernberg 1975, 1976). The therapist must quickly address these shifts in
order to make sense of the session.
At one moment, the patient experiences the therapist like the superego.
The next moment, he behaves like a superego to the therapist. When these
roles oscillate, the patient has a borderline level of character pathology
(Kernberg 1975).
Sometimes a patient shifts rapidly from the position of a primitive
superego to a mature conscience and back (Wurmser 1978, 156–157). She
denies moral standards and rules only to recommend them in the next
moment. She feels intense rage and punishes herself. Suddenly, she blames
her husband for punishing her and attacks him instead. Momentarily, she
has no compassion for her husband. Why? Her rage is not toward him, but
toward a projection she placed on him. She does not distinguish him from
her projection. She dehumanizes him as the “cause” of all her suffering. She
does not see how she inflicts suffering on herself.
Patients with a borderline level of character pathology identify with the
pathological superego or project it onto the therapist. Their reality testing
and capacity for symbolic thinking collapse. Thus, no exploration of feeling
is useful until the therapist restructures the defenses of splitting and
projection.
SPECTRUM OF IDENTIFICATION: SYNTONICITY
The following statements illustrate the spectrum of syntonicity:
Parent
to child
in the
past:
“You are bad.”
Patient
to self
today:
“I’m sometimes too critical of myself.”
“Maybe I should criticize myself.”
“I should criticize myself.” [Some differentiation since the patient
recognizes her agency: one who “should” criticize herself. The
“tyranny of the shoulds” (Horney 1950) is a sign of superego
pathology.]
“I hate myself.” [Less differentiation. “I hate myself” indicates an
implicit awareness of agency since she realizes she does this to
herself.]
“I’m bad.” [The patient, now identified with the critical parent,
does not see how she criticizes herself.]
“I’m evil.” [No differentiation of herself from her identification.]
When a patient says she is evil, she equates the image (evil) with reality
(who she is). She believes the self-attack is a fact, not a way she abuses
herself. Self-reproach and self-deprecation become substitutes for realistic
self-appraisal (Britton 2003). She views herself through devaluing rather
than loving eyes (J. Ten Have de Labije, personal communication).
A healthier patient says, “It is a fact that I am fat. That’s not my
problem. The problem is that I misuse that fact to punish myself. When I
am angry with people I love, I turn the anger onto myself and call myself
names, like fat. I protect others from my anger by hating myself instead. I
used to say, ‘I am fat’ rather than ‘I am angry with my boyfriend, who
treated me badly.’” She knows the criticism does not fit the reality of who
she is. Her self-criticism is consciousness dystonic (Sandler and A. Freud
1985). She does not accept self-devaluation as accurate.
At severe levels of superego pathology, the patient will not see her selfattack as a cruel way to treat herself, but as an accurate description of who
she is. She cannot differentiate herself from her defense. If she sees her selfattack, she may not see that it hurts her. If she sees how it hurts her, she may
say she deserves it.
For instance, a patient, having shared deep grief with me, suddenly
apologized to me then said, “I am a piece of shit.”
Th: Could this be a form of self-criticism?
Pt: It’s a feeling. I feel like shit.
Th: That’s not a feeling. That’s how you treat yourself. After all, if I
spent all day telling you that you are a piece of shit, by the end of
the day you would be feeling “shitty,” right?
Pt: That’s true.
Th: If you tell yourself that all day, you’ll feel shitty too. Do you think
this self-berating might be hurting you?
Pt: Yes.
The patient can’t differentiate herself from an identification, which she
enacts. If she were in a play, acting the role of a punitive parent, she could
separate herself from her role in the play. But in therapy, she does not see
she is acting like her father. She does not see that she is attacking herself.
When acting like her father, she thinks that self-devaluation helps her and is
satisfying. Like her devaluing father, she says, in effect: “I’m just doing this
for your own good.”
Syntonicity and Self-Observing Capacity
The patient enacts identifications with ignoring, neglecting, and denying
parents. If he ignores, neglects, and denies his feelings, his character
defenses will undermine his ability to perceive reality (Kernberg 1975).
Defenses reject reality and our feelings. The defenses do not observe the
truth. They reject it, distorting the patient’s awareness. The patient, enacting
an identification, looks at himself through dismissive eyes. This
identification does not protect him or give him a realistic appraisal. That is
why we say: “This mechanism probably saved your life in the past, and we
should thank it for how it protected you then. But what protected you in the
past is destroying your life today.”
The superego “has to sanction [our] perceptions, thoughts, and
sensations … if they are to be felt as real” (my italics) (Nunberg 1955, 148).
Thus, the patient who identifies with a dismissive parent dismisses his
experience as not real. He dismisses the therapist’s words as not real. Any
failure in the nonpsychotic patient to see reality is the result of superego
pathology. “Oh, that feeling isn’t real.” “That problem doesn’t exist.” “You
don’t need to pay attention to that.” Paying attention to and remaining in
harmony with reality protects the patient from suffering (Sandler in Sandler
and A. Freud 1985, 303). A patient who ignores reality cannot live in
harmony with it. As a result, he suffers.
Syntonicity and Observing Causality
Patients who do not see causality believe their defenses are helpful and
satisfying. The failure to see causality results in several thinking errors: (1)
victim stance (“Why do bad things keep happening to me?”), (2)
circumstantial thinking (“Things just happen to me” “It’s just one thing
leading to another”), or (3) a paranoid stance (“People have it in for me”
“Things will never work out for me”). Let us examine a series of statements
involving incorrect causality in patients with syntonic character pathology.
“You hurt me.”
True causality: “When you point out something I do to myself that hurts
me, I feel guilty over how I have treated myself. Rather than feel
my guilt and sadness, and face how I hurt myself, I accuse you of
hurting me.”
“This therapy is making me worse.”
True causality: “When feelings are aroused in therapy, I punish myself.
Since I don’t see how I punish myself, I see only the resulting
suffering. So I assume the therapy makes me worse rather than my
defenses of self-attack and self-criticism.” [Of course, we assume
the therapist is not causing the regression.]
“Things keep happening to me, and I don’t know why.”
True causality: “When angry, I lash out at boyfriends and provoke them
to punish me by leaving. I don’t notice how my defenses sabotage
my relationships. So I don’t see how I make these things happen.”
“I keep getting blindsided by my wife. She yelled at me again before
I got out of bed.”
True causality: “When my wife verbally abuses me, I ignore it. Then I
have a wishful fantasy that she will be different tomorrow. When
she verbally abuses me tomorrow, I am ‘blindsided’ because she
bumps into my fantasy. She didn’t blindside me. I blind myself to
reality each time she verbally abuses me by paying attention to a
wishful fantasy.”
Blindness to defenses means blindness to causality. When we do not see
how we create our suffering, we assume others cause it. As a result, we pay
attention to other people instead of the defenses creating our suffering.
Ignoring inner experience opposes the therapeutic task: attention to and
acceptance of one’s internal life. A successful defense “is always something
dangerous.” It either restricts our awareness of reality or falsifies it (A.
Freud in Sandler and A. Freud 1985, 195). Help patients turn against
defenses so they can see reality.
UNCONSCIOUS GUILT VERSUS SELF-PUNISHMENT
We can differentiate three types of guilt: healthy guilt over misdeeds,
conscious neurotic guilty feelings that have a defensive function, and
unconscious guilt due to unconscious murderous rage toward loved ones.
Unconscious guilt due to unconscious murderous rage is a primary engine
of psychopathology (Davanloo 1990, 2000). Patients who are unable to bear
or face this unconscious guilt ward it off through self-punishment. Help
patients face their murderous rage and unconscious guilt so they can
overcome the self-punishment, which has perpetuated their suffering.
A patient with healthy guilt faces the wrong he has done to someone
and engages in reparation (Klein 1975a, 1975b). He feels empathy for their
suffering.
But the patient may avoid healthy guilt through
Denying his deed.
Acknowledging his deed, but denying any reason to feel guilt for it.
Punishing himself to avoid guilt and reparation.
Projecting onto others, believing they judge him and want him to feel
guilty. In this paranoid/schizoid solution, he does not bear his guilt
(Klein 1975a, 1975b).
When the therapist points out how the patient hurts herself, the patient
may avoid feelings of guilt and grief by
Punishing herself: “I know. I’m terrible.”
Punishing the therapist: “What you are doing is not helpful enough. I
can’t believe you get paid for doing this.” Now the patient criticizes
the therapist, doing to him what she was doing to herself.
Accusing the therapist of punishing her: “Why are you always
putting me down? I feel like all you do is criticize me!” Since she
does not see how she criticizes herself, she assumes the therapist
criticizes her. She becomes angry at the “critical” therapist rather
than at the defense of self-criticism.
Therapists often reassure patients of their good intentions to dispel
projections. This reduces the patient’s fear temporarily but not permanently.
If she does not learn to see how she projects and punishes herself, her
suffering will continue.
Some patients invite others to punish them. A man with a long criminal
history provoked other people verbally to beat him up. He felt rage toward a
neglectful, alcoholic mother and absent father. The guilt over his rage led
him repeatedly to provoke people to attack him. Now his guilt could feel
rational. After all, he had done something wrong (being verbally abusive).
He could feel some relief when someone else punished him. A beating was
less severe than the several decades of prison he had inflicted on himself.
The patient may punish himself or provoke punishment rather than
suffer the pangs of his own guilt. He withdraws narcissistically into selfpunishment rather than reach out to the person he hurt. Self-punishment
becomes a substitute for genuine guilt and reparation.
Chronic self-punishment creates symptoms of emptiness, fragmentation,
boredom, and irritability. Patients do not experience these symptoms as
deficits but as tormenting forms of self-punishment, which are substitutes
for healthy guilt (D. Carveth 2001). “Those of us who consider the
admission of sin and wrongdoing an intolerable insult to our narcissism and
find conscious guilt unbearable, are forced to resort to symptom formation.
The suffering entailed in our symptoms gratifies the superego need for
punishment and, at the same time, evades unbearable conscious guilt” (D.
Carveth and J. Carveth 2003, 2).
We can also avoid our guilt through helplessness and the victim stance,
denying our agency, responsibility, and choices. “I couldn’t help it,” rather
than “I made this choice.” “It wasn’t my fault,” rather than “I was at fault
because I chose to have the affair.” “It just happened” rather than “I made it
happen.” “There was some distance in our relationship,” rather than “I
distanced myself from my wife.” Demoralizing language denies the
patient’s agency and responsibility (D. Carveth and J. Carveth 2003, 3).
Self-punishment wards off conscious guilt (D. Carveth 2001) for deeds and
unconscious guilt due to fantasies linked to early traumas (Davanloo 1990,
2000).
Therapists often conflate guilt and self-punishment. Healthy guilt
derives from our love for others (D. Carveth 2002; S. Freud 1923/1961c;
Klein 1975a, 1975b). Self-punishment is a defense against guilt (Carveth
2002, 182–183; S. Freud 1923/1961c; Safa-Gerard 1998). Instead of
reaching out to the one she hurt, the person may reveal her self-punishment.
She says how “awful” she feels and reproaches herself. Rather than repair
the relationship, she asks the other person to repair her! “I hurt you, so
comfort me.”
Shame can also ward off guilt. Healthy shame signals that we have
failed to live up to our own standards and mobilizes us to act according to
them. When we do not repair the external relationship, unhealthy shame
wards off the experience of healthy guilt and reparation. We shame
ourselves rather than reveal our shameful deed to others and repair the
damage we caused.
“Guilty” feelings also have a defensive function. Patients who say, “I
feel so guilty,” are often taking an irresponsible position. “As long as I feel
‘guilty,’ I don’t have to repair the damage I caused. I don’t have to respond
to her pain.” “I feel so guilty” can be a substitute for genuine reparation.
The patient can sit around having “guilty feelings” and avoid her genuine
guilt and responsibility, or she can face her guilt, apologize, and repair the
relationship. Feeling bad simply because someone found out you did some
wrong is a prestage of morality. “Guilty” feelings are not the critical
element in developing a healthy superego (A. Freud in Sandler and A.
Freud 1985, 412).
Sometimes therapists try to “analyze away” these painful feelings rather
than help patients bear them. Protecting patients from the truth is not
compassion, but abandonment. Our task is to face the truth together, no
matter how painful. The therapist may need to ask the patient, “Your guilt is
so painful that you would rather escape it and punish yourself instead?”
“The point of compassion is not to eliminate suffering, but to lead a person
to the truth so he will be able to lead a life of truth” (Almaas 1987, 92).
Compassion merely on the side of feeling good is pseudocompassion.
We must feel compassion not only for the patient’s pain, guilt, and shame,
but also for her wish to face the truth and live closer to her ideals. The
therapist’s attention to this complexity helps the patient tolerate the pain of
seeing the truth. Help the patient face her guilt to address the defense of
self-punishment. We must replace self-punishment “with the capacity for
guilt, repentance, and reparation” (D. Carveth 2002, 186).
Treat neurotic “guilty feelings” as a defense. Do not explore them. Help
patients face genuine guilt over what they have done, and their unconscious
guilt over fantasies of murderous rage toward loved ones. Once the patient
can face the deep experience of unconscious murderous rage, guilt, grief,
longing, love, and pain over the broken bond, self-punishment is no longer
necessary as a defense.
MIRRORING SUPEREGO PATHOLOGY
Patients with superego pathology vary in their ability to differentiate
themselves from the identification they enact. As a result, they require a
spectrum of interventions to help them see their defenses. These
interventions range from cognitive to enactive interventions. The type of
intervention needs to be matched with the degree of self-observing capacity
the patient has. Now we will show a spectrum of self-observing capacity
and the range of interventions necessary to help patients with superego
pathology.
Low Superego Pathology
A patient with low superego pathology will criticize herself very gently
and can be helped readily to see and turn against the defense.
Pt: I don’t think I can do it.
Th: Do you notice how you underestimate yourself? [Point out the
character defense.]
Pt: I hadn’t seen that, but I see it now.
Low to Moderate Superego Pathology
In this example, the therapist needs only to point out the conflict
between the patient’s defense and his goal for the patient to turn against the
defense.
Pt: I don’t think I can do it.
Th: Do you notice how you underestimate yourself ?
Pt: But what if I can’t do it? [The patient is identified with his defense.]
Th: You have come here to overcome this problem you have at work
where you hold yourself back and let others surpass you, right?
[Clarify his goal.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: And you have asked me to help you get to the bottom of what leads
you to hold yourself back as soon as you declare a goal at work,
right? [Clarify the therapeutic task.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: You give up on yourself and tell yourself you won’t be able to do it.
That’s how you hold yourself back from your goal right now. Do
you see what I mean? [Clarify how his defense defeats his goal in
this moment. Create an intrapsychic focus.]
Pt: I’m holding myself back here? [Begins to see his defense.]
Th: When you doubt your capacity here, you hold yourself back. On the
one hand, you want to go full speed ahead. On the other hand, this
punitive mechanism in your mind doubts you and tries to get you to
put on the brakes. Do you see what I mean? [Point out the conflict.]
Pt: I do now. [Sees the conflict.]
Th: Do you want to doubt yourself a little bit more now, or shall we take
a look at the feelings underneath that have been driving this selfsabotage? [Point out the choice: avoid his feelings or face them.
Use a destructive defense or turn against it.]
Pt: I’ve got to stop doubting myself. [Patient turns against the defense.]
Moderate Superego Pathology
In this example, the patient is more identified with the defense. The
therapist first describes and then mirrors the defense so the patient can see
and turn against it.
Pt: I don’t think I can do it.
Th: Do you notice how you underestimate yourself ?
Pt: But maybe I’m really not able to. [She is identified with her
superego and does not see it.]
Th: Do you notice how you portray yourself as if you are incapable?
[Point out how she treats herself.]
Pt: It’s not that I want to portray myself that way, it’s just I think I am
incapable. [Identification with her superego.]
Th: [Silence. Since she portrays herself as incapable, she expects the
therapist to offer the capacity that she “cannot.” If the therapist
does not become active in response to her passivity, her defense will
fail, and feeling and anxiety will rise.]
Pt: [Becomes anxious.] Isn’t there something you can do? [Projection of
her healthy desires onto me while she remains identified with her
pathological superego.]
Th: If you really are as incapable as you say, we won’t have what we
need to succeed. If I give one hundred percent and you can give
only ten percent, you’ll just have a ten percent result. [Deactivate
the projection of her healthy desires onto me. Deactivate the
omnipotent transference. I can give only one hundred percent. I
cannot give, in addition, the ninety percent she claims she cannot
give to the therapy.]
Pt: That’s all I’ve had in therapy. [Rise in the alliance. She admits that
she has had only ten percent results.] I just think therapy can’t help
me. [She thinks therapy can’t help her. I have to help her see that
her passivity can’t help her.]
Th: Actually, you just said that you think you can’t help yourself. And
the good news is, you don’t have to if you don’t want to. [Mirror
her pathological superego.] After all, since therapy hasn’t
succeeded before, you may not want to invest in yourself again.
[Mirror her pathological superego.]
Pt: Funny you say that, since I had that thought before I came here
today. [She begins to see her pathological superego.]
Th: Sure, and let’s face it: you don’t have to invest in yourself if you
don’t want to. [Mirror her pathological superego.]
Pt: I want to! I just don’t know how. [Defense: helplessness.]
Th: You don’t have to invest yourself until you know how. There’s no
rush. [Mirror her pathological superego.]
Pt: But there is. I’m thirty-eight, and I’m still not married. I can’t keep
delaying, or else I’ll never get married or have a family. [The
patient acknowledges her healthy strivings and sees her conflict
more clearly.]
Do not interpret the patient’s defenses when she identifies with them. If
the therapist gives voice to the patient’s defense, the patient can more easily
see it within herself. So-called paradoxical techniques (M. C. Nelson 1962,
1968; Farrelly 1974; Spotnitz 1985; Weeks and L’Abate 1982; Weeks 1985)
build her self-observing capacity. Mirror the pathological identification so
she can see it and differentiate from it.
Never mirror the patient’s self-destructive wishes and thoughts if she is
feeling angry toward you, or if you want to argue with her. You will create a
misalliance. Mirroring the pathological superego is effective only when the
therapist feels no wish to control, argue with, or oppose the patient.
Severe Superego Pathology
The therapist is working with an impulsive patient in her twenties who
picks abusive boyfriends. Notice how the therapist works very carefully
only with the concrete facts the patient presents and then shows the patient
causality. In response to the patient identifying with her defense, the
therapist mirrors the defense several times to help the patient see and let go
of it.
Pt: I was really furious with my boyfriend for dumping me. So I went to
the bar, got drunk, and then got in a fight and got beat up. I think it
was because I had vodka. [Patient blames the vodka for her
problems rather than her self-punishment, a defense against her
rage. No intrapsychic perspective.]
Th: You were angry. And, rather than feel the anger toward your
boyfriend, you got drunk, got in a fight, and invited people to beat
you up. [Point out the conflict.]
Pt: I didn’t invite them to beat me up. [She does not see how she
arranged her punishment.]
Th: You got drunk, got in a fight, and, by getting into a fight, invited
people to fight you and see if they could beat you up. [Point out
causality: getting into a fight invited others to fight and hurt her.]
Pt: Oh, yeah. [Said offhandedly. Syntonicity.]
Th: And that may be acceptable to you. [Mirror the syntonicity.]
Pt: No, that’s bad. I don’t want to get beat up. [She sees that getting
beaten up is bad, but she does not see how she invited this
punishment to avoid feelings of rage toward her boyfriend.]
Th: Although you don’t want to get beat up, you find yourself drinking
alcohol and getting into fights where you get beat up. [Mirror back
what she can see so far.]
Pt: Are you saying I shouldn’t drink? [She projects her healthy
awareness onto the therapist.]
Th: I have no right to tell you what to do. If drinking leads to fights, and
fights lead to getting beat up, and getting beat up is okay with you,
obviously there’s no reason to change your drinking. [Mirror her
pathological superego. This allows her to see it and blocks the
projection of her healthy capacities onto the therapist.]
Pt: Except the getting beat up part is not okay with me. [The defense of
self-punishment becomes less syntonic.]
Th: I see. [Therapist waits as the patient struggles with this conflict:
drinking creates results she does not like.]
Pt: I know I shouldn’t drink. [Projection of her healthy awareness.
“Should” implies that this is not her opinion.]
Th: It’s not a matter of “should.” [Block the projection of her healthy
awareness.] It’s really a matter of what choice works for you. You
can drink and get beat up or not drink and not get beat up [mirror
her conflict], but, in the end, it’s about how you want to treat
yourself. [Keep the focus intrapsychic: her feelings, her defenses,
and her results.]
Pt: But this getting beat up is bad. [Higher anxiety and feeling indicate
her destructive behavior is becoming more dystonic.]
Initially, the patient failed to see causality. She thought other people hurt
her. In fact, she hurt herself by getting into a fight. Mirroring her defense
helped her see and turn against it.
When the patient sees her defense and how it hurts her, she will
experience guilt and grief over the suffering she has inflicted on herself.
This step will trigger defenses against the guilt and grief. In response,
mirror the patient’s degree of conflict. She says, “That’s a problem,” in an
offhand manner. Her words suggest she wants to change. Her offhand
manner suggests she does not want to. Mirror the conflict between what she
says and how she says it. “So although that’s a problem (dystonicity), it may
be one you can live with” (syntonicity). Mirror the conflict between what
she says (dystonicity) and does (syntonicity).
Often, therapists mistakenly mirror the patient’s healthy words, but not
the unhealthy behavior. Suppose the patient says, “That’s a problem,” with
an offhand manner. If the therapist eagerly responds, “You can see how that
is a problem now,” the patient will respond halfheartedly “Yeah.” The
therapist listened to the patient’s words but not her passive behavior. Mirror
the degree of conflict shown between her words and behavior (Reich 1933).
This can range from no conflict at all (complete identification with the
defense) to extreme conflict (guilt over how she has hurt herself).
Mirroring the toxic identification enhances the patient’s reality testing
(Wexler 1975). She can see the self-destructive defense and repudiate it.
Rather than resist the therapist (who personified her healthy strivings), she
can resist her pathological identifications (M. C. Nelson 1962, 121). When
the patient identifies with her defense, mirror it. This ego-strengthening
technique allows partial breakthroughs of grief and guilt until she tolerates
her internal conflict rather than using projection to avoid it.
Mirror the precise degree of the patient’s conflict.
Moderate superego pathology: mirror conflict. “Part of you wants to
overcome these difficulties but another part of you wants them to
continue.”
Severe superego pathology: mirror the absence of conflict. “That may
not be a problem for you.”
Patients who use words to act out a pathological relationship are less
accessible to rational communication. When the patient enacts an
identification, the therapist should shift to enactive interventions. Rather
than interpret the unconscious identification, the therapist enacts it. Do not
explain; demonstrate. An enactive style of communication undercuts the
patient’s resistances and communicates with the patient on his level (M. C.
Nelson 1968). This is different from role-playing a conscious role (Sherman
1968). Here, the therapist enacts the identification the patient acts out
unconsciously so she can observe and question it.
The therapist mirrors the incongruity between the content and the
emotional implications of the patient’s expressions (Sherman 1968, 115).
The patient might say, “What I’m going to say is so stupid.” This is verbal
self-abuse. Yet her tone of voice implies that she is not being unkind to
herself, just honest. So the therapist mirrors her self-abuse, “You took the
words out of my mouth,” bringing these incongruities to the patient’s
attention.
When the therapist sides with the resistance, he appears as if he is the
mirror image of the patient. “[T]he patient recognizes himself
unconsciously … in the therapist’s resistance-joining remarks.” This is
because the identification the therapist enacts “is a function of the
unconscious part of the patient” (Brandt 1968, 124).
Vignette: Mirroring a Character Defense
Notice how the therapist points out the patient’s character defense (not
committing to himself) and then mirrors the defense until the patient lets go
of it.
Pt: I’m not totally committed to the therapy.
Th: Although this is your goal, you are letting me know you are not that
committed to you. [Point out how the patient treats himself. This
establishes an intrapsychic perspective.]
Pt: I was thinking it was about the therapy.
Th: It’s really about you. It’s your goal, and you are not committed to it
or to you. And the good news is, you can be as committed or as
uncommitted as you want to be to yourself. [Point out reality and
mirror his pathological superego.]
Pt: [He shifts in his chair and laughs nervously. Rise of anxiety due to
addressing his defense.] I’m just concerned about how long the
therapy could take.
Th: That makes sense. If you don’t commit to your goal and to yourself,
how long will therapy take? [Causality: defenses create the
problem—a prolonged therapy.]
Pt: I get your point.
Th: What level of noncommitment do you think would be in your best
interest? [Mirror his pathological superego.]
Pt: [Laughs. Smiles. Rise of anxiety.] I want to say, “Of course I want to
commit to myself!” [Rise of alliance.]
I mirror the patient’s pathological stance. By seeing it in me, he sees
how he hurts himself. With his final statement, he begins to take a stand
against his self-neglect (Brandt 1968, 126). Sometimes therapists ask, “Isn’t
this a departure from reality when you act as if you agree with a
pathological identification?” No. You reveal the toxic identifications in the
patient’s mind so he can now see and turn against them.
REFLECT THE DEGREE OF SYNTONICITY OF
CONFLICT
When addressing conflict, we must also attune empathically to the
presence or absence of awareness of conflict. The degree of conflict takes
place on a spectrum from no awareness of conflict to complete awareness.
The following examples illustrate the spectrum of conflict and some
interventions appropriate for them.
No conflict regarding a desire for closeness
Pt: I want to be close to people. [No anxiety or defense.]
Awareness of conflict that is dystonic
Pt: I want to be close to people, but I pull back from them, and I don’t
like that I do that. [Conflict: I want to be close, but I pull back.
Dystonic.]
Th: You don’t want to pull back because that interferes with your goal.
[Reflect her conflict of wanting closeness, avoiding it, and not
wanting to avoid.]
Pt: Yes, it gets in my way.
Th: If you don’t pull back now, what are you feeling right now here with
me?
Conflict without awareness
Pt: I want to be close to people, but it doesn’t happen. I don’t know
why. [Said with a dismissive shrug. The patient wants closeness but
is unaware of her defenses, unlike the previous patient.]
Th: You want to be close to people, but you don’t know how you
manage not to be close. [Mirror her conflict.] But that may not be a
problem for you. [Mirror the syntonicity indicated in her tone of
voice.]
Pt: It is a problem because I can’t get married if I don’t get close to
people. [Not knowing is becoming dystonic.]
Th: If you don’t recognize how you keep people at a distance, you
won’t get married. And you say that would be a problem. [Mirror
the dystonicity: not knowing means her problem will continue.]
Pt: Do you think I keep people at a distance? [Projection.]
Th: Only you can know for sure. [Block the projection.]
Pt: I must because my last boyfriend said I did. [Projection.]
Th: But in your opinion? [Block the projection.]
Pt: I did yell at him a lot, and I threw the engagement ring into the
gutter. [Alliance is improving.]
Th: You think that yelling at him a lot and throwing the engagement
ring into the gutter could have kept him at a distance. [Link her
defenses of discharge and acting out to the problem.]
Pt: Yes. I didn’t see it at the time though.
Disavowal of conflict
Pt: I’m not sure I want to be close to people. [The patient denies a wish
for closeness.]
Th: That may not be something you want. [Mirror her disavowal of
conflict; do not attribute to her a wish for closeness she has not
expressed.]
Projection of conflict
Pt: I know you think I should want closeness, but I don’t want it.
[Patient denies she wants closeness. She projects onto the therapist.
She tries to have a conflict with the therapist rather than bear it
within herself.]
Th: If you don’t want closeness, you have every right to avoid it. I have
no right to ask you to want something you don’t want. [Reflect her
denial and block her projection of the desire onto the therapist.]
Denial of conflict
Pt: I don’t want to be close with my wife. And I don’t see that as a
problem. [Defense: denial.]
Th: That may not be something you want to change. [Mirror the
patient’s denial and stated absence of conflict.]
Pt: My wife thinks it’s a problem. [Defense: projection.]
Th: Since she’s not here, I can’t help her with her problem. [Block the
projection.]
Pt: I don’t know why I should be here. [Inviting the therapist to state a
reason so he can oppose the therapist.]
Th: Neither do I. I mean, if this is not a problem for you, why would
you come here for a nonproblem? [State incompatible realities.]
Pleasure in the identification with the resistance
Pt: I don’t want to be close. I enjoy it when he thinks we are really
close, and meanwhile I’m a million miles away, and he doesn’t
know it. [Manic identification with the rejecting role. Pleasure in
rejecting her boyfriend secretly without his knowledge.]
Th: You don’t want to be close, and that’s a source of pleasure to be able
to be distant without him knowing it. Perhaps that is your goal.
[Mirror her identification, her pleasure, and her absence of
conflict.]
Pt: I don’t know if I would say it’s my goal. [Begins to move away from
the syntonic identification with the rejecting role.] It’s just what
happens when I distance myself.
Th: If you remain distant with men, you should have distant
relationships with men. [Mirror her pathological superego.]
Pt: That sounds sick. [Beginning to turn against the defense.]
Th: What makes you say that? [Mirror her pathological superego.]
Pt: Choosing to have distant relationships doesn’t sound right.
Th: It doesn’t have to sound right to feel right. If being distant feels
right, why not? [Mirror her pathological superego.]
Pt: I have actually thought that, but when I hear you say it, it sounds
crazy. [Greater capacity for tolerating internal conflict.]
Mirror the exact degree of, or lack of, conflict the patient experiences.
Mirroring a lack of conflict might seem counterintuitive. Some therapists
reflect the conflict they want to see rather than the degree of conflict the
patient experiences. Instead, we must relate to the level of conflict the
patient has in order to be as attuned as possible to the patient.
When the patient fully identifies with the defense, do not mirror conflict
the patient does not experience. Mirror the defense. When the patient
partially identifies with the defense, mirror conflict (“Part of you is here for
a positive purpose, but at the same time, you sabotage yourself. You seem to
be at war with yourself.”). When the patient is differentiated from the
defense, encourage her to turn against it: “Underestimating yourself like
this will only perpetuate your self-defeat. Why do that to yourself ?”