
COUNTERTRANSFERENCE AND SUPEREGO
PATHOLOGY
The patient can project onto the therapist her wishes and impulses or her
superego (Racker 1968). This leads to two issues of countertransference for
therapists. The therapist identifies with the patient’s wishes. As the sole
advocate, the therapist begins to overwork in therapy and starts to feel
depressed, suffering from the patient’s resistance. Or the therapist identifies
with the patient’s superego. Now the therapist feels critical of the patient
and pathologizes her. Once the therapist understands with what aspect of the
patient he is identifying, he can better empathize with the patient’s inner
conflict. As a result, the therapist can then help the patient integrate her
wishes, feelings, impulses, and superego rather than project onto others.
The patient’s attacks can also trigger the therapist’s unresolved superego
issues (Racker 1968, 174–180). We can become depressed under the force
of the patient’s criticisms or disappointment. Or we may become angry at or
feel persecuted by the patient. Masochism makes us not only seek failure
but fear it (Racker 1968). As a result, the therapist’s masochism blinds him
to the patient’s good and healthy aspects. Masochism acts like a filter,
enabling the therapist to see only the patient’s healthy wishes or only the
aggression, resistance, and defenses. The therapist who sees only the
patient’s healthy wishes, masochistically submits to the patient’s defenses
and resistance, calling that stance empathic listening. The therapist who
sees only the patient’s pathology, becomes a superego to the patient (A.
Freud 1936). “The truth is that the neurotic is the prisoner of his resistances
and needs constant and intense help from the analyst if he is to liberate
himself from his chains” (Racker 1968, 178).
The masochistic therapist can fall into two traps. He can remain passive
in the face of resistances, failing to fight for the patient. Or he can become
overactive, fighting for the patient who does not fight for himself.
Collaborating with the patient’s defenses and resistance reveals the
therapist’s wish to be frustrated by him rather than to frustrate his defenses
and resistance. To recognize the good and bad in the patient we must
recognize the good and bad in ourselves. To remember the good in the
patient while addressing his superego means remembering the good in
ourselves as well as our own superego difficulties. “[E]xperiencing the
patient as one’s self [is] the basis for understanding” (Racker 1968, 179). If
we see only the good or only the bad, we fail to identify with the entire
patient. To see only pathology in the patient requires no genius on the part
of the therapist, only projection.
SUMMARY
The superego is best viewed as a system (Barnett 2007). It encompasses
the conscious and unconscious parts of the mind that criticize and judge our
actions, provide our internal ideals, serve as our “inner voice” or
conscience, constitute our capacity for guilt and remorse, insist on the need
for self-punishment, and provide our inner sense of morality.
These elements of our humanity are shaped by culture and religion, but
they are formed in the crucible of early relationships. Ideally, through
childhood and adolescent development, the young adult emerges with the
capacity to lead his life in accord with his inner standards, ideals, and
values. Some, given their insecure attachments in early life, trauma, and
other factors, develop superego pathology based on defenses, which enact
pathological identifications.
The superego is a concept. Thus, it cannot act (Ryle 1984). To be clear
clinically, focus on the defenses the patient uses that enact identifications
within the superego.
Superego pathology takes three basic forms. The patient judges himself,
judges others, or projects that others judge him. These forms occur on a
spectrum of reality testing. As a result, interventions must be tailored to the
patient’s capacities.
Often the major obstacle to effective work is the therapist’s own
problems. If we doubt ourselves, we will not recognize the defense of selfdoubt. What we condemn in ourselves, we will judge in others. If we blame
others for how we hurt ourselves, we will not see the patient’s
externalizations. Anything we ignore in ourselves, we will ignore in our
patients. The therapist needs supervision and personal psychotherapy to
help the patient on this mutual journey.
Defenses are our conditioning, not our essence. In a sense, there is no
such “thing” as a superego. There are only our defenses, which can put us in
a trance. We have these defenses, but we can forget the person who has
them. Acceptance of who you are undermines the habit of self-rejection.
Trying to reject, push away, or fix oneself are forms of self-hatred. Who you
are is what is here. You are here to discover who is always here: the person
hidden under the habits of self-hatred.
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Barnett, B. (2007). “You ought to!” A psychoanalytic study of the superego
and conscience. London: Karnac Books.
Carveth, D. (2001). The unconscious need for punishment: Expression or
evasion of the sense of guilt? Psychoanalytic Studies, 3(1), 9–21.
http://www.yorku.ca/dcarveth/guilt.html.
Carveth, D. (2002). Self-punishment as guilt evasion: Theoretical issues.
Canadian Journal of Psychoanalysis, 14(2), 177–198.
Davanloo, H. (1990). Clinical manifestations of superego pathology. In
Unlocking the unconscious (pp. 163–192). New York: Wiley.
Davanloo, H. (1990). Clinical manifestations of superego pathology, part II:
The resistance of the superego and the liberation of the paralyzed ego.
In Unlocking the unconscious (pp. 193–216). New York: Wiley.
Frederickson, J. (2010) Separating ego and superego in a recovering drug
addict. http://www.istdpinstitute.com/resources/.
RECOMMENDED MATERIALS
If you would like more information on working with projection in a
borderline patient, visit http://www.istdpinstitute.com/DVD/. There you can
purchase a DVD series that focuses on restructuring projection.
T
CHAPTER TWELVE
Superego Pathology: Addressing Character
Defenses
he patient who uses a character defense does to himself what
someone did to him in the past (Fenichel 1945, 1954, 114; S. Freud
1917/1961a; Kernberg 1975, 1984). If a parent ignored his feelings
or devalued him, he ignores his feelings or devalues himself. By enacting a
past relationship he wards off feelings and desires rising in therapy
(Greenson 1967; Kernberg 1980, 156–157).
Some patients use repressive defenses and then shift to enacting a past
relationship to avoid experiencing feelings. This enactment can take the
form of the transference resistance, doing to the therapist what was done to
the patient in the past. Or the patient may use character defenses and treat
himself as he was treated. Character defenses are often demonstrated in the
patient’s character traits and nonverbal behavior rather than in his
associations (Kernberg 1984, 211). The more severe the patient’s character
pathology, the more pathological traits function simultaneously as character
defenses and transference resistance (Kernberg 1984, 210–211).
Thus, every character defense reveals the history of the patient’s
suffering (Kernberg 1976, 79; Reich 1933, 158). For example, a patient
spoke of problems in his relationship with his girlfriend. I noted that,
although he said this issue was important, he described it in a nonchalant
manner. As I focused on his detached stance, he realized that he expected
me to tolerate his distance and noninvolvement without complaint, just as
his mother expected of him. He began to sob. This illustrates how character
defenses enact an identification with the aggressor (A. Freud 1936). In this
enactment, the patient simultaneously dismissed his feelings (character
defense) and his therapist (transference resistance). His character defense
functioned simultaneously as a transference resistance.
A character defense is revealed in how the patient is with you: how he
acts, behaves, and relates. We are less interested in what he says than how
he says it. For instance, character defenses can take the forms of a manner
of talking, gait, facial expressions, typical attitudes such as smiling,
derision, haughtiness, overcorrectness, or the manner of politeness (Reich
1933, 47). The constant use of a defensive “attitude” indicates that
repressed feeling is continually present. The patient’s rudeness, excessive
politeness, indifference, or criticalness (Fenichel 1954, 114) becomes a
resistance in therapy.
The character-disordered patient says he will do something, but he
doesn’t. He collaborates verbally, but not nonverbally. He says he wants to
look at a feeling, but avoids eye gaze, looks uninvolved, sits in a detached
posture, and speaks with a dismissive tone of voice. The words are right but
not the music. He says he wants to be involved but acts uninvolved. He says
he is angry, but sounds detached. When his words don’t match his behavior,
trust his behavior, not his words. Comment on what he does, not on what he
says.
An exclusive focus on the patient’s words underestimates the
importance of his behavior. If you interpret, the patient responds with more
enactment. For instance, if you interpret to a patient that he detaches to
avoid emotional closeness, he will enact his character defense of detaching:
“I suppose you may have a point.” To address a character defense, point out
the enactment (Reich 1933, 27). “You detach from your feelings and from
yourself right now here with me.” Character defenses must be our first
priority when they occur because they prevent any genuine emotional
connection.
Therapists often mistakenly believe the character-disordered patient sees
his defenses and how they create his presenting problems. When the patient
enacts a character defense, he does not observe it. Thus, no interpretation or
confrontation is possible.
Principle: First block the enactment of the character defense, point out
the patient’s behaviors, and then invite him to see how he
relates to himself.
In the following example the therapist points out the patient’s behaviors
and then invites the patient to see the pattern of those behaviors: a
pathological way of relating to herself, the character defenses.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for hitting you?
Pt: I just forget about it. [Character defense: she enacts her
identification with a forgetful, dismissive parent by doing to herself
what her parent did to her—ignores herself.]
Th: You forget about the hit. You forget about the bruised lip. You forget
about the pain. [Point out the behaviors.] Do you notice how you
forget and ignore yourself and your feelings? [Invite the patient to
see the pattern of these behaviors: how she relates to herself.]
Sometimes therapists ask prematurely, “Do you see how you dismiss
yourself ?” But the patient does not yet see her behavior, much less that she
ignores herself. Always point out the patient’s behaviors first. Then she will
more easily see the pattern of the behaviors, which is the character defense
itself: how she treats herself.
Pt: It’s no big deal.
Th: You say the hit is no big deal. You say the bruise is no big deal. You
say the pain is no big deal. Do you notice how you dismiss and
ignore your feelings? [Describe the facts and then the pattern of
how she relates to herself.]
Once the patient can see how she relates to herself (the character
defense), help her see the price of those defenses.
“When you turn this criticism back onto yourself, does this mobilize
you or paralyze you?”
“When you turn this criticism back onto yourself, does it make you
feel good or does it make you feel depressed?”
“When you say his hit is ‘no big deal,’ does that help you create the
kind of relationship you want with your boyfriend?”
Once the patient begins to see that her character defense is causing her
presenting problems and symptoms, we can help her disidentify with the
defense.
“Is turning anger onto yourself your friend, or could it be your
enemy?”
“Is dismissing yourself what you want to do, or is this what you want
to change?”
Then we can mobilize her will to the therapeutic task.
Would it make sense to you that we take a stand against this selfdismissal that has been hurting you?”
“Is this self-attack something you would like to overcome?”
“Do I have your permission to interrupt anytime I sense you might
be dismissing yourself or disrespecting yourself ?”
STEPS IN ADDRESSING CHARACTER DEFENSES
Since character defenses are based on the enactment of an identification
and since they are usually syntonic, they require several steps of defense
work before they become dystonic.
1. Point out the patient’s concrete behaviors.
2. Point out how she relates to herself (the enactment of the character
defense).
3. Help her see the price (how the defense creates her presenting
problems and symptoms).
4. Mobilize her to turn against the defense and engage in the task.
As soon as she turns against a character defense, feelings will rise
within a split second, then anxiety and a new character defense. Intervene
before the next defense so she can see when it occurs.
“What do you notice feeling when you say you want to take a stand
against that mechanism?” “What do you notice feeling when you say
you want the two of us to join forces against that mechanism?”
“Notice how that anxiety comes in to attack you right now just for
saying you want to take a stand against that punitive mechanism? As
if it’s against the law to take your side instead of the side of selfattack?”
Intervening immediately before the defense helps her recognize and
differentiate herself from it. She learns that self-attack does not happen
randomly but predictably: anytime she expresses her feelings and desires.
Every time we reject our emotional experience in the present moment
we identify with someone who said, “You should be different from how you
are now.” Through the character defense we try to be what we are not, to
feel what we do not feel, and to want what we do not want. A dismissive
parent’s judgment becomes a substitute for the patient’s self-awareness,
direct perception, and knowledge. Help the patient create a space between
herself and her defenses. Focus on her feelings, her essence, which has
always existed underneath these defenses. Help the patient consciously
defend herself against these attacking defenses. The experience of her
emerging feelings and will differentiates her from the defenses so she can
more easily let go of them.
Mobilizing the will helps the patient differentiate herself from her
identifications. Ask her what she wants. Remind her of her desire that
conflicts with the enacted desire of others seen in character defenses
(“Would you please ignore your feelings right now?”). Love of the
emotional truth of this moment replaces habitual ignoring. Awareness of
emotional reality replaces judgment. Questions such as “Is this your will?”
are not rhetorical. They invite her to pay attention to the desire at the center
of her life. They help differentiate her being from the character defenses,
which have hidden it.
Once the patient has differentiated herself from these identifications and
can defend herself successfully against them, she can face her rage. She
must disidentify with those character defenses. Otherwise, when she faces
her rage toward others, she will identify with them and turn the rage onto
herself again.
STRUCTURALLY PRIMITIVE THINKING
Character defenses are formed when children think with a
preoperational level of intelligence (Piaget 1970). When using character
defenses, a patient is often stuck in preoperational thinking, unable to
observe these defenses or cognitions based upon them (Leahy 2001;
McCullough 2000). “I am evil.” Piaget (1970) described the structural
process of this kind of thinking as centration. “It’s all my fault.” The patient
focuses on one dimension and cannot consider other perspectives. Thus, he
forms a global conclusion about himself or others based on this limited
perspective. “I’m a shit.” For instance, if he notices a fault in himself now,
he ignores his qualities in the past. “I always mess up relationships.” The
adult using preoperational thought will see himself as the sole cause of an
event, rather than consider the roles of other people. “My wife wouldn’t
have had the affair if I had been more understanding of her.” Due to
centration, he cannot “decenter” to stand outside and observe his thinking or
enactment. Thus, when we point out his character defense (“Do you notice
how you call yourself names?”), he may process your intervention from
within preoperational thought. “But I really am an idiot!”
POINT OUT HOW A CHARACTER DEFENSE IS AN ENAC
TED IDENTIFICATION
When the patient attacks herself, her attention is focused on the content
of her self-attack: “I’m ugly.” Shift her awareness from the content to the
process of her judgment. Do not argue with her about her attractiveness.
Point out the identification: how she relates to herself. “Do you notice how
you put yourself down right now?” Block and label each character defense
immediately. Help her become aware of and disidentify with her self-attack.
Clarification of Character Defenses: Identify the Defense as a
Pathological Way of Relating to Herself
Draw the patient’s attention to each character defense until she
experiences it as a painful symptom, “a foreign body which [she] wants to
get rid of” (Reich 1933, 50).
“How do you feel when you talk to yourself that way?”
“Do you see how you minimize your feeling? Is that fair to you?”
“It’s a shame to talk over your important feelings. Don’t they deserve
our attention?” (Warshow 2008)
“Do you notice how you undermine yourself ?”
“Do you see how you devalue yourself ?”
“Do you notice how you reject your feelings and yourself right
now?”
Clarification of the Price of the Defense
Help the patient see how the defense causes the patient’s presenting
problems. If the patient can see how the defense is no longer her friend but
her enemy, she can more easily let go of the defense.
“Do you notice how you want to deny and avoid the reality of my
compassion? Wouldn’t that be sad if you deprived yourself that way
here with me?”
“Do you notice how you condemn yourself now rather than just feel
your guilt?”
“Do you hear how you condemn yourself now? Is this selfcondemnation helping you or is it deadening you, killing you off
piece by piece?”
“Is this self-condemnation an expression of love for him, or an
expression of hatred for yourself? Does hating you help him?”
“Is it true you are worthless? Or is this self-condemnation worthless?
Do you want to give to your son your love or your self-hatred? What
will be helpful to him?”
“Does this contempt for yourself help you to reach out and be a
better mother? Or does this contempt for yourself lead you to
withdraw from him even more?”
“You’ve told me you desperately want to defeat this depression.
Unfortunately, your passive detached state will perpetuate it. It’s
your choice if you want us to take a look at how you are feeling in
this moment here with me” (Warshow 2008).
“Is this self-hatred the best in you? Or is it hiding the best in you?”
“You just called yourself an idiot. Is that something you need to hear
more often?”
“Is this judgment helping you, or it is just making you feel bad?”
“What does that judgment keep you from seeing in yourself ?”
“What does your judgment want to make sure you don’t see?”
Clarification: Differentiate the Patient from the Defense
Patients have used character defenses so long that they assume the
defense is who they are. Hence, the therapist must differentiate the patient
from the defense.
“You are not the problem. This punitive judgment is the problem.”
“That punitive part of your mind is not protecting you. It is attacking
you.”
“You can hide yourself in this cloak of shame and embarrassment.
But, if you do, how will we be able to know and support you? Why
should you be ashamed or embarrassed by this natural feeling? It’s
sad to see you shaming yourself. Would you agree?” (Warshow
2008)
Vignette One: Differentiating the Therapist from the Projection
In this example, the therapist has to differentiate the patient from his
defense and then help the patient differentiate the therapist from the
projection.
Pt: When I shared that fantasy with you I began to think how sick it was
for me to think that about you and your wife. [Character defense:
self-contempt.]
Th: We see two things: you had a fantasy toward me. That is not the
problem. The problem is that there’s this punitive part of your mind
that punishes you for even having a fantasy about me. [Point out
the character defense.]
Pt: I am worried about your reaction. [Defense: projection.]
Th: But even before you came here today you called yourself sick. Even
before you came here you judged your fantasy. [Point out her
internal judgment.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: Then we see how you put that judge onto me. But this was your
own internal judgment—condemning yourself for having a fantasy.
[Point out her internal self-attack and undo the projection of her
superego.]
Pt: [Tears.] I was afraid.
Th: You are afraid of how harshly you will judge yourself if you share
your feelings with me. But you forgot that you were afraid of how
harshly you would judge yourself. You put the judge on me and
then thought you were afraid of me. But you are also trying to
defend yourself from this internal judge that condemns you. [Point
out how she is defending herself, not from her parents or me but
from her internal judgment.]
The patient becomes anxious not only because of an urge she is tempted
to share. She is afraid of how severely she may punish herself. She doesn’t
have to fear her parents anymore. They are not in the therapy office. If she
can see how her self-attack is the danger, she need no longer fear the
therapist. Then we can face the rage her defense is covering.
Vignette Two: Clarifying the Price of a Character Defense
Notice how the therapist helps the patient see the character defense of
self-attack and then clarifies the price of the defense. Only when the patient
sees the price does she begin to let go of the defense.
Th: You see this self-attack. Are you willing to defend yourself from it?
Are you willing to take a stand for you instead of taking a stand for
self-attack?
Pt: I don’t know. [Character defense: I abandon myself and refuse to
protect myself from my own self-attack.]
Th: You don’t know whether you will take your side instead of the side
of self-attack. [She takes the side of her identification with an
abandoning parent rather than take her own side.]
Pt: I’m more afraid others will attack me. [Defense: projection of the
superego.]
Th: That makes perfect sense to me. If you are unwilling to defend
yourself against your own self-attack, you will be unable to defend
yourself against the attacks of others.
Pt: Maybe I don’t love myself. [Character defense: self-hatred.]
Th: If you don’t accept your love, you won’t be willing to accept the
love of others. As long as you reject yourself, you will continue to
choose men who reject you. Why do that to yourself? [Identify the
price of the defense.]
Pt: [Rise of feeling. Tears in her eyes.] Maybe that is how I love.
Th: But whenever your love goes against your freedom, you are doing
something else in the name of love (Osho 1977). What you call love
I call self-hatred. [From the perspective of an abandoning parent,
the child shows her love for her mother by abandoning herself. But
from the perspective of the patient, this is self-hatred.]
Pt: [Sigh. Tears streaming down her face.]
Vignette Three: Clarifying the Price of a Character Defense
This vignette illustrates how to persist so the patient can recognize a
defense. When patients have attacked themselves for so many years, selfattack appears to be an obvious truth rather than a form of cruelty to
oneself.
Pt: I know that was stupid of me to say. [Character defense: selfdenigration.]
Th: Wow! Do you see what you just did?
Pt: What?
Th: Do you see how you just verbally abused yourself? [Point out the
character defense.]
Pt: Well, it was stupid. [Character defense: self-devaluation.]
Th: Is that a kind or a cruel thing to say yourself ?
Pt: It was stupid.
Th: Keep repeating that to yourself, and let me know how you feel.
[Draw her attention to the defense and the impact it has on her.]
Pt: It was stupid. It was stupid.
Th: How does that make you feel when you say that to yourself ?
Pt: Bad.
Th: When you verbally abuse yourself, you make yourself feel bad.
Why do that to yourself ?
Pt: [Tears.] I always do that to myself.
Th: You refuse to defend yourself against this verbal abuse.
Pt: I hadn’t even thought of that. [Character defense: ignore yourself
and your pain.]
Th: You didn’t think of defending yourself against this verbal abuse.
Pt: But shouldn’t I think about my mistakes?
Th: How many times did you make that mistake?
Pt: Once.
Th: And how many times did you remind yourself of it and call yourself
stupid?
Pt: Probably hundreds of times.
Th: So is that thinking about a mistake or is it self-torture?
Pt: I see your point.
Th: You can torture yourself, or you could defend yourself against this
torturous habit. What shall we do?
Notice the stepwise manner in which the therapist helps the patient:
Step One: Help the patient observe her defenses (how she treats herself).
Step Two: Help the patient pay attention to her defenses.
Step Three: Help the patient differentiate her defenses from feeling and
anxiety.
Step Four: Help the patient see causality.
Step Five: Help the patient turn against her defenses.
Step Six: Help the patient bear the feelings that emerge when she turns
against her defenses.
As soon as the patient neglects, ignores, or dismisses herself, interrupt
her. Label her behavior, using her concrete words. Once she can see her
behaviors, she can see her defense. In this case we had an interesting
question, “Shouldn’t I think about my mistakes?” Thinking about a mistake
once so you can correct it is thinking. Ruminating about one’s mistakes
thousands of times is self-torture. And it should be labeled that way.
Patients with character defenses often cannot differentiate thinking from the
misuse of their thinking for the purpose of self-torture. This differentiation
is essential.
If the patient faces her rage toward an aggressor before she has let go of
her character defenses, she will immediately turn the rage back onto herself,
becoming more depressed and symptomatic. The patient must turn against
these character defenses before it will be safe to explore high levels of rage.
To turn her against the defense, show her how she relates to herself.
“Do you notice how you dismiss yourself ?”
“Do you notice how you laugh at your pain?”
“Do you notice how you give up on yourself and abandon yourself
?”
Only when the patient can see how she relates to herself, can we begin
to help her see how she relates to the therapist. “Do you notice how, when
you dismiss your feelings and laugh them off that you invite me to do the
same?” “If we ignore your feelings and anxiety together, what kind of
relationship will we have? Will that be a healing relationship or a
dismissive relationship?”
Use the patient’s words to show the patient the precise way she
dismisses herself. Always repeat the patient’s words (e.g., “No big deal”) so
she can see the pattern of self-dismissal. Also, her use of the word it is the
rug under which she sweeps her feelings and her boyfriend’s deeds. “It’s no
big deal.” “I don’t make much of it.” “I forget about it.” The word it hides
the stimulus: her boyfriend slapped her in the face and gave her a bruise. Do
not use the word it. Always describe the facts her it hides: the hit, the
bruise, and her pain.
Also notice the sequence: show the ways she says these things are no
big deal. After three examples she can look at them and recognize the
pattern of self-dismissal. She can’t see the pattern right away because she
doesn’t see the facts. If you ask immediately if she sees her self-dismissal,
she won’t know what you are talking about. Help her see the facts so she
can recognize the pattern.
Do not point out the price of the defense until the patient can see the
defense. Always point out the behaviors, and then ask if she can see the
defense, “Do you notice how you dismiss and ignore your feelings?” Do not
say, “We see this is how you ward off your feelings.” You may see this, but
the patient may not.
In the following example, the patient does not see the defense because
she does not see the pattern of her behaviors. Notice how the therapist
points out the patient’s behaviors until she can see them and then asks if she
can see the pattern: the defense.
Pt: I don’t see how I’m ignoring my feelings.
Th: When you say his hit is no big deal, is that a way to pay attention to
his hit or ignore it?
Pt: Ignore it. But I don’t see why I should pay attention to it.
Th: You can see, when you say his hit is no big deal, that is a way to not
pay attention to his hit. When you say the bruise is no big deal, is
that a way to pay attention to the bruise or to look away?
Pt: To look away.
Th: When you don’t pay attention to the hit and you look away from the
bruise, do you see how you ignore the hit and your bruise?
Pt: Yes.
Repeat the patient’s words to show everything she does not think about.
Establish a concrete chain of facts, illustrating how she ignores herself and
her feelings. This careful, step-by-step defense identification helps her shift
from enacting to observing her defense. If she does not see how she forgets
the slapping, the bruise, her feelings, and herself, she won’t see the
evidence that she ignores herself. Always help her see the defense before
pointing out its function and price. Otherwise, what you say will make no
sense to her. If she does not see the defense, do not argue with her. Point out
the evidence so she can see her defense.
After identifying the character defense to the patient, clarify its price
and function and then help her differentiate herself from and turn against it.
Always point out how the defense creates the patient’s presenting problems
and symptoms.
Th: When you ignore his hit and the hits of other boyfriends, you show
them that hitting you is no big deal, and it’s acceptable to you. No
wonder you stay with abusive boyfriends. You say their abuse is no
big deal. When you say getting hit is no big deal, could this be a
reason you have trouble leaving bad relationships?
The patient has indicated that she gets into bad relationships and has
trouble leaving them. If we can show how her defense hurts and traps her,
she will be more motivated to let go of it. Here is another example of
clarifying the character defense.
Th: Notice how you laugh over your pain? [Identify the character
defense.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: Is your pain funny? [Make the defense dystonic.]
Pt: No.
Th: What kind of relationship would we have if we sat here and agreed
your pain is funny and laughed at it? [Draw the patient’s attention
to the relational price of her defense.]
Pt: Not a good one.
Th: This laughter and covering of your feelings, does this protect you or
your father who molested you? [Draw the patient’s attention to the
function of the defense.]
Pt: It protects him.
Th: Who shall we protect here: him or you? [Invite the patient to turn
against her defense of self-dismissal.]
Pt: Me.
Every time the patient lets go of a character defense, she lets go of an
identification within the pathological superego. Within a split second, the
patient may experience a new self-attack, self-hatred, self-criticism, selfdismissal, or projection of the superego. This pattern explains why these
patients often suffer severe regressions. As soon as she lets go of her
character defense, ask what she feels before the next defense occurs. This
helps build her capacity to tolerate her feelings without attacking herself.
Let’s continue with our example.
Th: What do you notice feeling as you take this stand for you instead of
your father?
Pt: [Sadness rises in her face.] I’m afraid. [Anxiety attacks her for
taking her side.]
Th: It’s wonderful you notice. See how this punitive mechanism comes
in now to attack you just for taking your side instead of your
father’s? [Show causality: turning against the identification
triggers anxiety. Help her differentiate herself from her defense.]
Pt: I didn’t see it before.
Th: But notice now how this punitive mechanism comes in here to
punish you? It’s as if a policeman comes in to Taser you with
anxiety, as if you broke the law by taking your side. Do you notice
that? [Again pointing out causality and separating her from her
defense.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: Shall we break the law and take your side? [Invite the patient to
engage in the therapeutic task: let go of the defense and face her
feelings instead.]
Pt: Sure.
These interventions differentiate the patient from the character defense.
Now she can feel the rage toward her molesting father without turning it
onto herself.
SUMMARY
A character defense not only wards off feeling, it is a way of relating to
oneself. Point out how the patient treats herself and help her pay attention to
her self-abuse. This focus will help the patient see, pay attention to, and let
go of these forms of self-maltreatment. Once she has let go of the
identification with an earlier aggressor, we can begin to explore her rage
toward that figure.
The playwright Henrik Ibsen once said that we must be careful not to
take away the lie that holds a person’s life together. But lies do not hold a
life together; they tear it apart. “You aren’t good enough.” “You deserve to
die.” “You don’t deserve anything good.” When we believe our lies or the
lies told to us, we suffer. By helping the patient moment by moment see the
lies she has been whispering to herself, we free her from the identifications
of her past and from her self-torture.
T
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Superego Pathology: Transference Resistance
herapy invites an emotionally close relationship. Based on earlier
life experience, the patient has mixed feelings, which she avoids
through defenses and the transference, the two main strategies for
resistance (S. Freud 1926/1961d).
The highly resistant patient is torn: she wants to rely on and to distance
from the therapist. We can resist therapy for several reasons: to avoid
feelings (repression), to enjoy gratifications such as punishing others or
avoiding responsibility for our lives (secondary gain), to pursue a longing
for an external good object (primary gain), or to punish ourselves due to
guilt over unconscious rage (superego resistance) (S. Freud 1926/1961d). In
each case, defenses and transference resist the rise of any “material derived
from the unconscious” (Fenichel 1945, 27).
WHAT IS TRANSFERENCE RESISTANCE?
We should differentiate feelings, transference resistance, and projection.
Unconscious feelings rise when the therapist tries to form a relationship. As
we described earlier, using the abused dog analogy, any time we become
closer to people, feelings rise in the body as part of our nonconscious
perception of threat or safety (Andersen et al. 2005; Hassin et al. 2006;
Panksepp and Biven 2012).
Some patients cannot tolerate the experience of these feelings. Instead,
they resort to projection: “I’m not angry at you. You are angry at me.”
Rather than feel his feelings, the fragile patient projects them onto
others. His projection (“The therapist is angry”) is not transference, but a
defense against experiencing feelings toward the therapist.
In contrast, the highly resistant patient avoids his feelings toward the
therapist by using repressive, tactical, and character defenses. As the
therapist addresses the defenses against feeling, however, they begin to
work as a system. The patient begins to enact a relationship from the past,
the transference, to resist the rise of feelings toward the therapist (Davanloo
1990; S. Freud 1912/1957a, 1926/1961d; Strachey 1934). Hence, the term
transference resistance.
Now the defenses work together to form a pathological relationship. For
instance, as a therapist worked with a patient, the patient became vague.
After a few minutes, the patient became withholding. Rather than use
defenses to avoid feelings toward the therapist, the patient began to act like
his withholding mother (transference resistance). As the therapist addressed
this withholding behavior, the patient began to feel rage at the therapist.
Then his mother came to mind, whereupon he experienced complex mixed
feelings toward her. The sequence was (1) a rise of feelings toward the
therapist based on earlier experience with a withholding mother, (2)
resistance of those feelings by enacting the relationship he had with his
mother (withholding from the therapist), (3) dissolving of the resistance
with the therapist, (4) emergence of feelings of rage toward the therapist,
and (5) experiencing of a link to feelings toward his mother in the past.
Now he could experience feelings toward her without enacting the past
relationship with others.
To summarize, the patient experiences mixed feelings based on earlier
relationships. Rather than experience those feelings (based on an earlier
relationship), the highly resistant patient resists them by enacting a past
relationship. The fragile patient resists them through the defense of
projection.
Earlier in the book we showed how to address repressive defenses,
which help us avoid feelings. Then we showed how to work with regressive
defenses, which cause a regression in reality testing and functioning. In this
section of the book we are addressing character defenses and the
transference resistance, two ways of enacting past relationships. Since these
forms of resistance are based on the enactment of a past relationship, we
have to address their relational implications.
We handle character defenses by pointing out how the patient relates to
himself (his enactment of a past relationship). We handle the transference
resistance by pointing out how the patient relates to the therapist. Although
we have addressed these in separate chapters, highly resistant patients use
both character defenses and the transference resistance to avoid feelings and
the therapist. So you will need to address both of them to help the patient
become free of superego pathology.
The transference resistance creates a past pathological relationship
rather than a healing therapeutic alliance, prevents emotional closeness in
relationships, prevents the patient from experiencing the feelings triggering
his defenses and anxiety, encourages him to fail at the pursuit of unrealistic
wishes rather than to succeed at the pursuit of realistic healthy desires,
enables him to identify with his character defenses, and perpetuates his
suffering.
The Spectrum of Resistance
Patients can resist the rise of feelings in many ways, but we can see
patterns of resistance across the spectrum of psychoneurosis. The following
list shows the spectrum of resistance from moderately to highly resistant
patients.
Moderately resistant patients use tactical and repressive defenses to
repress feelings.
Fragile patients resort to regressive defenses to “relocate” their
feelings, internal judgment, or defenses.
Some highly resistant patients use repressive defenses and then shift
to using character defenses and a transference to resist the
experience of feelings.
More highly resistant patients begin therapy using character
defenses, enacting a relational pattern they use throughout their
lives. They exhibit these character traits more in nonverbal behavior
than in their associations (Kernberg 1984, 211). As the therapist
addresses those character defenses, the patient begins to enact that
past relationship directly with the therapist (the transference
resistance) (Fenichel 1945; Kernberg 1984, 218–221; Reich 1933).
The transference resistance is dissolved through (1) identifying,
clarifying, and confronting it in the here and now between the therapist and
patient; and (2) the resulting breakthrough of feelings, which reveals its
origin and purpose.
The Evolution of the Transference Resistance
The highly resistant patient starts out using defenses against offering a
presenting problem.
“I’m not sure I have an internal problem.” [Defense: denial.]
“You should ask my wife. She’s the one who had the idea I should
come to therapy.” [Defense: projection.]
Address each defense until the patient declares a presenting problem for
which he seeks help. Then find out if he wants to engage in therapy. If so,
then address his defenses against offering a specific example where his
problem occurs. Then explore that example, addressing his defenses against
feeling.
During these interventions, a shift occurs. The patient begins to distance
himself from the therapist. He looks away, avoiding the therapist’s eyes. His
posture changes: he crosses his arms and legs or slouches in the chair. He
speaks in a dismissive and detached tone of voice. He uses verbal tactical
defenses such as hypothetical speech, vagueness, generalization, and
diversification. These defenses not only ward off feeling, they ward off the
therapist. These interpersonal defenses signal a rise of feelings toward the
therapist.
When a patient uses defenses to prevent contact with the therapist, do
not try to explore feelings. You would not try to walk into someone’s house
when the door is locked. Instead, address these defenses against human
contact first. When the patient lets go of those defenses, feelings will
become more accessible.
Since these defenses work together to create a pathological relationship,
point out that relationship. Each defense becomes a brick in the wall the
patient erects between himself and others. Shift your focus from individual
defenses to the pathological relationship they create (Benoit 1990, 1991).
Th: Do you notice how you are looking at the floor? [Defense
identification.]
Pt: Yeah. What? Am I supposed to look at you?
Th: I just wondered if you noticed how you avoid my gaze.
[Transference resistance identification.]
Pt: I find it easier to think when I look away.
Th: You find it easier to think when you avoid my eyes. [Identify the
transference resistance.]
Pt: [Sighs, shifts in his chair.] Yes. [Looks out the window.]
Th: Do you notice how you look out the window when you talk to me?
[Identify the transference resistance.]
Pt: [Looks back at the therapist and then slouches in his chair.] I like
the view.
Th: How involved would you say you are here today? [Identify the
transference resistance.]
Pt: I think I’m very involved.
Th: You said you’re a lawyer. If a prospective intern were sitting like
this in your office for an interview, how involved would you say
she was? [Identify the transference resistance.]
Pt: Not too involved, I guess. [Patient begins to see his transference
resistance.]
Th: How involved? One hundred percent, fifty percent, twenty percent?
Pt: I’d say about twenty percent.
Th: What can we do about this eighty percent that’s missing here? After
all, if you’re only twenty percent here, you’ll just have a twenty
percent result. [Clarify the transference resistance: its price.]
He has trouble tolerating the conflict between sharing feelings and using
defenses. So he tries to transform his internal conflict into an interpersonal
one with the therapist. Do not confront his defenses yet. Help him see them
and their price first. If you respond to his provocations, the conflict will be
between the two of you instead of within him.
Shift from Defense to Transference Resistance Identification
Previous sections of the book have shown how to address defenses.
Now we will show how to address defenses when they function as a
transference resistance.
Th: Do you notice how you are going up in your head now, getting a
little distant? Do you notice how you are pulling away and avoiding
looking at me? [Identify signs of the transference resistance.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: What will be the impact on our work here if you withdraw and
become distant? [Point out the price.]
Pt: I probably won’t get anywhere.
Th: What do you think we can do about this tendency to withdraw so we
can have a better result? [Encourage the patient to let go of the
transference resistance.]
Pt: I guess I need not to withdraw and go up in my head.
Th: If you don’t withdraw and go up in your head, what do you notice
feeling here toward me? [The emergence of the transference
resistance suggests that feelings are rising toward the therapist.
When the patient lets go of the resistance, ask about those feelings.]
Let us look at two examples to illustrate the difference between working
on defenses versus working on the transference resistance.
Address defense: “Do you notice you detach from your feelings?”
Address transference resistance: “Do you notice this wall of detachment
you put up now between you and me?”
Within the transference resistance, always emphasize the relational
implications of the defense. Emphasize how the defenses create a treatmentdestructive relationship.
Steps in Addressing the Transference Resistance
Sometimes the patient enacts a transference resistance at the beginning
of a therapy. Usually, it evolves. First, the therapist invites the patient to
form a therapeutic alliance. Then the patient starts to have feelings toward
the therapist. Then the patient starts to distance himself from the therapist
and those feelings through enacting a past relationship: the transference.
Whenever the transference resistance arises, the sequence for handling it
always remains the same (Worchel 1986a, 1986b):
1. The therapist invites a close relationship.
2. The patient experiences feelings toward the therapist based on past
relationships.
3. The patient enacts a past relationship (character defense or
transference) to avoid experiencing those feelings.
4. The therapist addresses the character defenses and transference
resistance until they collapse.
5. The patient experiences feelings toward the therapist.
6. The patient experiences links between feelings toward the therapist
and feelings toward someone in the patient’s past.
Structure of the Transference Resistance
In the transference resistance, the patient does to you what his parent
did to him or he acts as if you are doing what his parent did to him. This
enactment takes nonverbal and verbal forms. For instance, he may act like
his passive, withdrawn father, inviting you to be active and forthcoming. Or
he may act like his cold, withholding mother, inviting you to be warm and
giving. The therapist often feels angry, experiencing what the child felt
when treated in these ways (T. Ogden 1982; Racker 1968).
The transference resistance has the structure (Troendle 2005) of an
internalized object relation (Kernberg 1975). Table 13.1 shows the structure
of the internalized object relationship as it is enacted in therapy.
Table 13.1 Structure of the transference resistance
Patient’s enactment Therapist’s expected role
I am passive. You must be active.
I ignore my inner life. You must pay attention to it.
I oppose therapy. Convince me to do it.
I don’t have hope. You must have hope.
I don’t have the energy. You must have it.
I am not an emotional person. You must be emotional
Key insight: the patient avoids feelings by enacting one role in a past
relationship and inviting the therapist to enact the other.
The patient avoids an intrapsychic conflict by creating an interpersonal
conflict
The patient simultaneously wants to face and avoid his feelings. To
avoid his intrapsychic conflict, he creates an interpersonal one. “I don’t
depend on anyone who could withhold from me like my mother did.
Instead, I act like my withholding mother, and you depend on me!” This
explains why patients say
“You think I should look at this.” [Projection: “I don’t want to look
inside. I withhold from you like my mother did with me.”]
“You seem to think this is important, but I don’t see why.”
[Projection. “You want to look at my inner life. I withhold any desire
to relate, just like mother did to me.”]
“What do you think is my problem, doctor?” [Projection: “I don’t
know; you must know. I withhold from you like my mother withheld
from me.”]
When the patient projects his healthy desires, the therapist can
unwittingly speak up for them. Then conflict occurs between the therapist
and the patient rather than within the patient. The patient enacts one role in
a past relationship, unconsciously inviting the therapist to enact the other
role. If she does, the therapy becomes stuck. If she doesn’t, the patient’s
resistance fails, and change occurs.
The patient cannot access deep feelings in other relationships as long as
she wards off the therapist. If there is a problem in the therapeutic
relationship, explore it first before exploring feelings in other relationships.
You might think of the relationship with the therapist as the front door of a
house. If it is locked, there is no way to view other rooms in the house. So
work on the front door, the relationship to the therapist. Once the
transference resistance is dissolved and you gain genuine contact with the
patient, exploring feelings in other relationships will be fruitful.
PSYCHODIAGNOSIS OF THE TRANSFERENCE
RESISTANCE
To intervene, the therapist must assess the type of transference
resistance and the element of it that is in the forefront. The sequence of
psychodiagnosis occurs as follows:
1. The patient enacts the transference resistance.
2. Psychodiagnosis of the element in the forefront occurs.
3. The therapist intervenes to deactivate the resistance.
4. Decreased resistance leads to rise of unconscious feeling and
anxiety.
5. The next patient enactment of transference resistance occurs. The
sequence continues as before.
In the transference resistance, each patient response expresses one of
four elements:
An identification with a parent
A projection of healthy desires onto the therapist
An invitation for the therapist to take an omnipotent stance
A regressive wish
Each intervention deactivates one of those elements, as the following
interventions will illustrate.
Psychodiagnosis of Response and Therapist Intervention
When assessing the transference resistance, note which element of the
transference resistance is in the forefront: identification with a parent,
projection of healthy desires, regressive wish, omnipotent transference.
Once you understand which element is in the forefront, you will know
which intervention will be most helpful in the moment.
Patient Response: Identification with a Parent
In the transference resistance, the patient can enact an identification
with a parent’s defense. In the following example, the patient enacts the role
of an avoidant parent who leaves all the responsibility for the relationship to
the child. Notice how the therapist deactivates the patient’s identification
with the parent.
Pt: But this makes me anxious. I don’t want to be anxious.
Th: If avoiding what makes you anxious is keeping you calm and giving
you the results you want, then obviously that is what you should do.
But as long as you avoid what makes you anxious, we cannot help
you with it. We have two choices. We can avoid what makes you
anxious, and then the anxiety will be in charge. Or we can face
what makes you anxious so you can be in charge. But as long as
you avoid what makes you anxious, this therapy cannot help you.
Principle: Deactivate the patient’s identification by mirroring his stance
and pointing out reality—therapy will fail. The conflict is
between reality and his resistance to it.
Patient Response: Projection of the Patient’s Healthy Desires onto the
Therapist
In this element of the transference resistance the patient projects the
child’s desires onto the therapist. Meanwhile, the patient remains identified
with the parent. Notice how the therapist deactivates the patient’s
projection. By doing so, the therapist avoids an interpersonal conflict with
the patient, so the patient begins to experience an intrapsychic conflict
instead.
Pt: I know you think I should take a look at this.
Th: Only you can know whether it would be in your interest to look at
it.
Principle: Block the projection of the patient’s healthy wishes. Do not
advocate for his wish to look inside; leave that task in his
hands.
Patient Response: Expression of the Regressive Wish
The transference resistance always involves regressive wishes, which
cannot be satisfied in reality. The therapist must point out and deactivate
those regressive wishes. If the therapist tries to satisfy those regressive
wishes, he will fail, and the therapy will remain stuck.
Detached or uninvolved transference resistance: “Heal me emotionally
while I remain emotionally uninvolved.” “Help me while I hide
from you.”
Oppositional or defiant transference resistance: “Heal me while I
oppose you. I expect my behavior to have no impact on our
success.”
Passive or helpless transference resistance: “I will be passive. You must
give the activity I refuse to offer.”
Do not gratify regressive wishes. Instead, remind the patient of reality:
regressive wishes are impossible to satisfy, and they lead to a failed therapy.
Pt: I was hoping I could just let this therapy happen to me.
Th: And how long will that take?
Principle: Point out reality: the regressive wish is not possible.
The conflict is not between you and the patient. The conflict is between
reality and the patient’s resistance to it. Resistance leads to self-defeat.
Healthy relationships operate according to certain laws, which we violate at
our peril. Passivity, detachment, defiance, and helplessness do not work. No
therapy can succeed under those conditions.
Patient Response: Inviting the Therapist to Take an Omnipotent Stance
To succeed in any relationship, both partners must put 100 percent of
their effort toward a shared goal. In the transference resistance, the patient
proposes an impossible, omnipotent role for the therapist.
Detached or uninvolved transference resistance: “I will give twenty
percent of my involvement. Then I want you to offer one hundred
percent of your involvement plus the eighty percent I withhold.”
The therapist cannot give what the patient withholds.
Oppositional or defiant transference resistance: “I want you to put one
hundred percent of your effort to the therapy while I work one
hundred percent against it. You will need to give your one hundred
percent, the one hundred percent I am not giving, plus one hundred
percent to counter my opposition.” Yet no therapist can give 300
percent!
Helpless or passive transference resistance: “I cannot do this. You must
do whatever I say I can’t do. Carry me on your back so I don’t have
to take the steps in my journey.” Or, “Change me magically by your
omnipotent interpretation so I don’t have to change how I deal with
my feelings.” “You must give your one hundred percent and my
hundred percent.”
Principle: Deactivate the omnipotent transference by reminding the
patient of reality.
In summary,
1. Help the patient disidentify with the parent.
2. Deactivate the projection of his healthy desires onto the therapist.
3. Deactivate the omnipotent transference.
4. Clarify the regressive wish and its realistic consequences.
5. Help the patient let go of the resistance.
These interventions put together facilitate a “head-on collision”
(Davanloo 2000; Kalpin 1994) between the patient and his resistance. His
resistance defeats him as someone defeated him in the past. This experience
of internal conflict between the patient and his resistance leads to a
breakthrough of feeling. To facilitate that intrapsychic crisis, the therapist
will assess which element of the transference resistance is in the forefront
(see figure 13.1).
Figure 13.1 Decision tree for psychodiagnosis of the transference
resistance
The Process of Change
We must first help the patient see and differentiate himself from this
habitual pattern of behavior so he can make a different choice in his
relationships. Changing the transference resistance takes place in three
stages:
1. Differentiate the patient from the resistance (Coughlin Della Selva
1996; Davanloo 2000, 2001; Ten Have de Labije 2001).
2. Mobilize and strengthen the patient’s awareness of his healthy
desires (Coughlin Della Selva 1996; Davanloo 1990, 2000, 2001;
Lebeaux 2000; Ten Have de Labije 2001).
3. Help the patient make a healthy choice (Coughlin Della Selva 1996;
Davanloo 1990, 2000, 2001; Ten Have de Labije 2001).
To differentiate the patient from the resistance, help him see his
defenses and then help him see the ways he relates to you. Then help him
see the price of his noncollaboration. Since he is enacting a past relationship
automatically and habitually, he does not see his resistance. Therefore, you
must persistently point out his defenses and relational behavior so he can
see the difference between who he is as a person and how he wards you off.
The patient’s resistance is not a “part” of him. It is merely an automatic,
habitual pattern of behavior. We must differentiate the person from his
choices, his essence from his conditioning. Once he can see his resistance,
he can make different conscious choices, rather than be the hostage of
automaticity.
To strengthen the patient’s awareness of his healthy desires, remind him
of his goals and the ways the resistance defeats them. By strengthening his
capacity to observe his feelings, anxiety, and defense, we help him become
aware of himself as someone differentiated from his behaviors. Now he can
observe automatic reactions rather than identify with them. He learns to see
the difference between his essence as a person and his resistance.
Once these three stages have been accomplished, the transference
resistance drops, and feelings break through. Although we must also
mobilize self-observing capacity and work with character defenses, here we
will focus only on deactivating the transference resistance.
Deactivating the Passive/Helpless Transference Resistance
The examples below illustrate common forms of the passive/helpless
transference resistance and ways you can deactivate it. Notice how pointing
out reality is key to addressing this resistance.
Example One
Th: What’s the problem with which you would like me to help you?
Pt: I was hoping you could tell me what my problem is. [Invitation to
form a passive transference resistance.]
Th: That’s not something I can do. Only you can know if you have an
internal emotional problem. [Confront his regressive wish with
reality.]
Pt: But you have all this training. Surely you can tell me if I have a
problem or not.
Th: Not really. Since I haven’t heard anything from you, I have no idea
whether you have an internal emotional problem or not. Only you
can know for sure. [Deactivate the projection onto the therapist.]
Pt: Let me tell you about what’s going on in my marriage. [The patient
lets go of the passive transference resistance momentarily and talks
more collaboratively.]
Example Two
Pt: Why do I do this? [The patient, having faced a destructive defense,
intellectualizes to avoid the painful feelings that would rise if he
faced his self-destructiveness. He invites the therapist to share
insights while the patient passively is “healed.”]
Th: The question isn’t why you do this, but what do you want to do
about this destructive habit of devaluing yourself because this
would be a disaster for our relationship. [Block the passive
transference resistance.]
Example Three
Th: What’s the feeling toward him for kicking you out of the house?
Pt: I don’t know how to feel. [Metacommunication: “Work hard for me
while I take a helpless stance. Offer to this therapy what I am
‘unable’ to give.”]
Th: Do you notice how you underestimate yourself right now? [Point
out the defense.]
Pt: What?
Th: Do you notice how you underestimate yourself right now? You say
you don’t know how to feel; yet every baby in the world feels. You
have felt. Do you see now how you underestimate yourself and put
yourself down? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: I do put myself down a lot. I know that. [She sees her defense.]
Th: That’s important here because if you underestimate yourself and put
yourself down here, we won’t have your full capacities to achieve
your goal. [The price of the defense.]
Pt: But what if I’m not able to feel? [Metacommunication: “Heal me
emotionally while I have no feelings.”]
Th: Then we won’t be able to succeed. [Contrast her regressive wish
with reality.]
Pt: [Anxiety indicates a rise of complex transference feelings.] Can you
give me a list of feelings? [Another form of helplessness.]
Th: The issue isn’t a list. The issue is that you say you cannot feel. If
that is true, then therapy cannot help you. [Contrast her regressive
wish with reality.]
Pt: Isn’t there something you could do? [Metacommunication: “Please
take on the omnipotent transference.”]
Th: No. I can do what I can do, but I can’t feel your feelings for you. If
you cannot feel, then we have to accept that you don’t have the
capacities necessary to do therapy. [Mirror her resistance to
deactivate the projection onto the therapist. Then point out the
reality consequences.]
Pt: [Sigh.] Now I’m angry with you. [Weakening of the transference
resistance allows feelings to rise.]
Th: How do you experience that anger toward me physically in your
body?
Therapists often wonder, “Wasn’t the patient’s anger a result of your
stance with her?” No. Every time she became angry with people, she
covered it up with a helpless stance. Focusing on the transference resistance
allows the covered-up feelings to rise.
Example Four
Pt: I’m not sure I have the energy to do this. [Metacommunication:
“You will need to provide the energy I can’t offer.”]
Th: That will be a problem. [Block the transference resistance.]
Pt: Isn’t there something you can do? [Invites the therapist to take on
the omnipotent transference.]
Th: No. If I give one hundred percent here and you give one hundred
percent, we can have a very good result. [The therapeutic alliance
and its result.] But if I give one hundred percent and you can give
only twenty percent, we’ll just have a twenty percent result. [The
transference resistance and its result.] If twenty percent is all you
can give [mirror the pathological superego], then a twenty percent
result is all we can hope for. [The price of the resistance.]
Pt: But what if I can’t do it? [Invite the transference resistance.]
Th: If you can’t do it, I can’t carry you on my shoulders the rest of the
way. [Deactivate the omnipotent transference and regressive wish.]
We’ll have to accept that you won’t be able to achieve your goal.
[The price.]
Pt: [Begins to cry.] But I can’t go on this way! [Turning against the
resistance.]
Th: I hear you, but, as long as you give up on yourself, this is the result
you’ll have. [The transference resistance creates this terrible
result.] What can we do about this destructive habit of giving up on
yourself? [Encourage him to turn against the resistance.]
Pt: I guess I have to stop giving up on myself. But I was hoping you
could do something. [Metacommunication: “I hoped you could heal
me while I give up on myself.”]
Th: I’m glad to help you. But I have to accept I can’t help you while you
give up on yourself. If you don’t have the energy to do this, I can’t
do it by myself. [Deactivate the omnipotent transference.]
Pt: [Cries.] That’s what my fiancée said. I gave up on our relationship
and I lost the best woman I ever had. [Now faces the price of his
resistance.]
In the passive or helpless transference resistance, patients present as if
they are less capable than they are. When working with the passive or
helpless transference resistance, the therapist asks a question and the
passive patient will reply: “I don’t know.” [Metacommunication: “Figure
that out for me while I remain passive.”]
The therapist can respond in one of these ways:
If you don’t, who will? [Deactivate projection of the omnipotent role
onto the therapist.]
Do you notice you are going a little passive now? [Identify the
resistance.] What impact will that have on our work? [Invite the
patient to notice the price of his resistance.] When the patient
answers, ask him: “So what can we do about this passivity because
this is going to get in your way?” [Deactivate the projection. The
patient will have to end his passivity for therapy to succeed.]
In the passive/helpless transference resistance, the patient invites the
therapist to give what the patient withholds. Some wonder, “What if he
cannot answer these questions in therapy?” We ask questions children can
answer: “What is the feeling toward him?” “Does putting yourself down
make you feel good or does it hurt you?” Questions for the heart do not
require great abilities of the head.
People demonstrate skills and intelligence every day. The patient may
be an emergency room nurse or a skilled carpenter. But in therapy,
“helpless” patients hide their real abilities under a façade of
pseudoincapacity. They enact the same pathological relationship in
marriage, friendships, and at work. There are exceptions, of course, such as
people suffering from Asperger’s syndrome or other neurocognitive
deficits. For most patients, however, helplessness is a transference
resistance.
Yet sometimes it can be hard to differentiate the projection of will in the
fragile patient from the passive transference resistance of the highly
resistant patient. Table 13.2 shows the differences in psychodiagnosis that
allow you to differentiate these two forms of resistance.
Table 13.2 Differentiating projection of will from the passive
transference resistance
Elements for
psychodiagnosis
Projection of will Passive transference
resistance
Anxiety Cognitive/perceptual
disruption
Striated muscles
Defense
structure
Regressive defenses Repressive and tactical
defenses
Reality testing Impaired Good
Reaction to
therapist’s “will”
Fear of the therapist’s
“will”
Comfortable with the therapist
being active while the patient
remains passive
Extent of the
resistance
Single defense The entire relationship
Response to
deactivating
projection of will
Drop in projective
anxiety and patient
engages in the task
Patient remains passive
When the therapist deactivates projection of will, the fragile patient’s
projective anxiety drops and she readily engages in the therapeutic task. Her
projection of will was the only defense preventing her from engaging in the
therapeutic task. In contrast, the patient with a passive transference
resistance uses many defenses that operate together to form a pathological
relationship. Thus, addressing only one defense leaves the rest of the
defenses functioning so they can form the passive transference resistance.
Deactivating the Oppositional or Defiant Transference Resistance
These examples illustrate common forms of the oppositional/defiant
transference resistance and ways you can deactivate it. Notice how
deactivating the projection of will onto the therapist is the key intervention.
Example One
Th: What’s the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: I don’t want to fing depend on you!
Th: Thank you for being so collaborative. [This is not said sarcastically
but honestly. The patient’s response was very helpful to the
therapist. His response has just let the therapist know exactly what
help is necessary.] Although your feet have brought you here, you
are also letting me know you don’t want to depend on me. [Avoid
the battle of wills. Point out the contradiction between what he did
(come to the session) and said (“I don’t want to fing depend on
you!”)]
Pt: You can’t make me depend upon you. [Patient invites a battle of
wills.]
Th: That’s true. I’m glad you realize that. [Deactivate his projection.]
You can depend upon me if you want, or you can decide not to.
Only you can make that decision. [Point out reality.] If not
depending on me is helpful to you, you have an obligation not to.
[Deactivate the projection that I want him to depend on me.]
Pt: [Tears in his eyes. With this deactivation of the projections, the
patient experiences conflict between his wish to depend, and his
resistance to doing so. He begins to talk more openly.]
Example Two
Pt: I’m not sure I want to get better. [Invites the transference resistance.
Metacommunication: “I don’t want to get better. Make me better
against my will.”]
Th: There’s no law that says you have to get better if you don’t want to.
[Mirror the denial to deactivate the projection of his desire to get
well onto the therapist.]
Pt: I don’t want to get better. [Invites the transference resistance.]
Th: Okay. [Pause. Avoiding a battle of wills deactivates the patient’s
defense.]
Pt: [Shifts in his chair and becomes anxious.] Well? [Invitation to a
battle of wills.]
Th: Well what?
Pt: Aren’t you going to say something about my not wanting to get
better? [Invites the therapist to get into a battle of wills.]
Th: Why should I? If you don’t want to get better, you have every right
to make that choice. [Point out reality.] I have no right to tell you
what to do. [Deactivate the defiant transference.]
Pt: But don’t you think that’s unhealthy? [Projection onto the therapist.]
Th: Only you can know if it’s unhealthy for you to not want to get
better. [Point out his choice.] Neither I nor anyone else can stop
you from making your choices. They’re yours. [Deactivate the
omnipotent transference.] If you don’t want to get better, that’s the
result you’ll have. [Point out the price of the resistance.]
Pt: [Shifts in his chair with a rise of anxiety.] Aren’t you going to fight
for me? [Invitation to the transference resistance.]
Th: Why should I fight for you when you have decided you are not
worth fighting for? [Outline the transference resistance.]
Pt: [Rise of anxiety.] That’s a sad thought.
Th: You are aware that it is sad that you treat yourself as if you are not
worth fighting for. [Mirror the healthy desire of the patient.]
Pt: Yes.
Some patients invite you to be the spokesperson for their healthy desire
so they can oppose you and ignore their internal conflict. Deactivate the
projection by mirroring his defenses and reminding him of the price. Avoid
a battle of wills between you and him. The conflict is between him and the
resistance that is creating his suffering. He will try to make the conflict
interpersonal. Keep it intrapsychic.
Defiant patients may respond to the therapist’s question, “What is the
feeling toward her?” by saying, “I just don’t share feelings.”
[Metacommunication: “Heal me while I refuse to reveal what I want you to
heal.” Omnipotent transference.]
The following examples show how to address this same patient response
from four different perspectives within the transference resistance.
1. Block the omnipotent transference.
Th: Then we won’t be able to get to the bottom of your difficulties.
2. Block the projection of the patient’s healthy will onto the therapist.
Th: The good news is you don’t have to. There is no rule that says you
have to share your feelings with me. [Reality: he can choose to
share or not to share.] It’s just that as long as you don’t share your
feelings with me, I’ll just be another useless therapist. Why do that
to yourself? [Reality: “I can’t help you with something you don’t
share with me.” Show the price of the transference resistance: it
perpetuates his suffering.]
Pt: I know you think I should share my feelings. [Projection: “Tell me
so the conflict is between us, instead of within me.”]
Th: Only you can know if it is in your best interests here to share your
feelings. [Block projection.]
Pt: But you’re a therapist. You must have an idea about this. [He invites
the therapist to say he should share so they could have a battle of
wills.]
Th: I have no right to tell you what you should do. This is your life,
your feelings, and your issues. Only you can know for sure what
you should do for yourself. [Block the projection of his healthy
desire onto the therapist.]
Pt: [Shifts in chair. Rise of anxiety.] I was angry with her for dumping
me. [He begins to share his feelings.]
After the patient has described a conflict with his wife, a rise of the
feeling and anxiety may lead to a defiant transference resistance. He may
ask, “Do you think I have a problem?” Or, “What do you think I feel?” Or,
“What feeling should I have?”
Avoid the battle of wills. Instead,
1. Deactivate the projection of his awareness.
Th: Only you can know for sure. [Deactivate his attempt to be passive
while you are the “omniscient” being. If you “know,” he will argue
with you rather than attend to his inner experience.]
2. Deactivate the projection of his suffering.
Th: Is it your misery or not? [The patient fails to see how selfdestructive defenses cause his suffering. Block the projection by
returning the question to him. If he admits his misery, he can be in
conflict with his transference resistance.]
3. Deactivate the projection of his healthy desires.
Th: If our work fails, it is your misery and your suffering. If our work
succeeds, it will be your happiness and your freedom. [Identified
with his defenses, the patient imagines he is defeating you instead
of himself. Remind him how his defenses defeat his goals.]
4. Mirror the patient’s defense to deactivate his identification with the
resistance.
Th: You may not have a problem. It is for you to decide.
Th: If this is working for you, obviously it’s what you should do.
[Deactivate the projection. He must declare whether or not this is a
problem.]
Pt: Why should I change? [Metacommunication: “Tell me why I should
change, so I can argue with you.”]
Th: Perhaps you shouldn’t. [Deactivate the projection. Now the battle is
between him and his resistance.] You love your resistance. You
have lived with this crutch your whole life. Why change now?
Principle: Mirror the resistance to block the projection.
The patient habitually frustrates his loved ones, making them suffer as
he did in the past with a frustrating parent. He replicates a past relationship
rather than allow a new one to flourish.
Deactivating the Uninvolved or Detached Transference Resistance
These examples illustrate common forms of the uninvolved/detached
transference resistance and how to deactivate it. Notice how within each
form of the transference resistance (passive, uninvolved, defiant, etc.) the
patient can act out the identification with the parent, project his healthy
desires, engage in the omnipotent transference, or enact a regressive wish.
Example One
Th: She dumped you. What are you doing with your feelings?
Pt: I’m dead to my feelings. [Transference resistance.
Metacommunication: “Heal me while I pretend to be dead.”]
Th: But this cannot be psychotherapy of the dead. If you are
emotionally dead, then this can be only a dead therapy. [Confront
his regressive wish with reality.]
Example Two
Th: What is the feeling toward this woman who dumped you?
Pt: There’s nothing there. [Invitation to detached transference
resistance. Metacommunication: “Heal me emotionally while I
present nothing to heal.”]
Th: That’s going to be a problem.
Pt: Why?
Th: Because if you have no emotions, we can’t help you with any
emotional problems. [Contrast his regressive wish with reality.]
Example Three
Th: You mention a problem regarding intimacy with your wife.
Pt: There’s a reluctance. [Invitation to a detached transference
resistance. Metacommunication: “Relate to me while I remain
uninvolved.”]
Th: You mean you are reluctant?
Pt: I guess you could say that. [By not declaring yes or no, the patient
enacts the transference resistance.]
Th: You guess? Either you are reluctant or you aren’t. It doesn’t make a
difference to me. Which is it, in your opinion? [Block his
detached/uninvolved transference resistance.]
Pt: I’m reluctant.
Th: You are reluctant to be intimate with your wife.
This patient tried to distance himself rather than co-create a healing
therapeutic alliance.
When the therapist asks a question about a feeling, the uninvolved
patient will reply:
Pt: I don’t have any feelings. [Metacommunication: “Heal me
emotionally when I have no feelings.”]
The following examples show how to address this same patient response
from four different perspectives within the transference resistance.
1. Deactivate the omnipotent transference.
Th: That’s going to be a problem because if you don’t have any feelings,
then obviously I won’t be able to help you with your emotional
difficulties. [Mirror his resistance (he has no feelings) and reflect
the price.]
Pt: But like I told you, I’m an unemotional person.
Th: And if that’s true, then we won’t be able to get to the root of your
emotional difficulties.
Pt: I can see that. But I thought that was your job. [Projection.]
Th: No. I can’t get to the bottom of your emotional problems if that isn’t
something you want. And if you don’t have emotions, as you say,
then obviously there would be nothing for me to get to the bottom
of.
Pt: So what do we do? [Projection. Metacommunication: “You, the
therapist, do something.”]
Th: Good question. As long as you take this position of the unemotional
man, the therapy will be useless to you. What can we do about this
unemotional position you are taking? [Invite him to turn against his
resistance. Point out its price and function: to destroy another
relationship and perpetuate his loneliness.]
Pt: I’m not sure I want to do anything about it. [Inviting the therapist to
take on the omnipotent role. Metacommunication: “Heal me while I
refuse to collaborate.”]
Th: Okay. [Pause. Mirror the resistance.] You have every right to keep
this façade of the unemotional man. It’s just that if you continue
this way, this therapy will end in defeat. [Patient begins to cry,
turning against the transference resistance.]
2. Point out denial of agency.
Pt: I feel detached and distant.
Th: You are detaching from your feelings and distancing yourself from
me right now.
3. Deactivate the projection of the patient’s healthy desire onto the
therapist.
Pt: How long will this therapy take? [Projection of responsibility onto
the therapist.]
Th: That depends on your motivation. [Point out the patient’s
responsibility.]
Pt: I don’t know if I should commit myself to this or not.
[Metacommunication: “Commit to me while I refuse to commit to
myself.”]
Th: You can be as committed or as uncommitted to your therapy as you
want. [Deactivate the projection onto the therapist.] How
uncommitted would you like to be to your own goal? [Mirror the
resistance.]
Pt: [Laughs.] I want to say, “Of course, I want to be committed to my
goal,” but I feel like holding back. [The patient begins to turn
against the transference resistance.]
4. Deactivate the projection of the patient’s awareness onto the
therapist.
Pt: I hear what you are saying, but I don’t think these defenses are
hurting me. I think they are holding me together. [The patient
invites the therapist to be the spokesperson for his healthy
awareness.]
Th: You know better than I if this is damaging your life. [Deactivate the
projection by returning the responsibility of knowing to the patient.]
Perhaps your detachment is creating the emotional closeness you
want in your marriage. If it is, you should keep detaching. [Mirror
the resistance by encouraging him to do what he is doing and also
mirror his denial that detaching hurts him.]
Mirroring the resistance helps the patient see the discrepancy between
his behavior and the results he wants. This keeps the conflict between him
and his resistance, thereby undermining it.
Deactivating the Patient’s Transference Resistance
A patient who enacts the transference resistance cannot see it or how it
causes his presenting problems. Help him see and turn against it.
1. Point out reality and mobilize the conscious therapeutic alliance.
Pt: I have a hard time relating to people. [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: Actually, you just said you have an easy time rejecting people and
pushing them away. [Confront the denial.] Is that the optimal level
of functioning you are looking for? [Mobilize the conscious
therapeutic alliance.] (Coughlin 2009)
Pt: [Tears in her eyes.] I feel like there’s a little girl in a cave afraid of
the light outside the cave. [Unconscious therapeutic alliance:
imagery depicts how her resistance traps her in a cave of defenses.]
Th: How sad that you have imprisoned yourself in that cave of rejection.
How long must you suffer in the darkness? [Mobilize the
unconscious therapeutic alliance.]
Pt: [Burst of grief.]
Vague language reinforces the resistance. Speak to the unconscious (H.
Davanloo, supervision 2002–2004). Use terms and phrases that highlight
the price of the resistance: great pain, suffering, loneliness, failure, doomed,
in prison, die without your children knowing you, perpetuating your
suffering, this is the cancer of your life. Remind the patient of her suffering
so she will turn against her resistance.
2. Mobilize the unconscious therapeutic alliance against the
resistance.
Th: This is self-destructive, isn’t it? You [the patient] come here under
your own will to get to the core of your problems and at the same
time you [the transference resistance] defeat the goal you have set.
Why perpetuate your misery this way? [Ask the patient why she
punishes herself to turn her against the resistance.]
3. Mobilize the unconscious therapeutic alliance by reminding the
patient how his resistance defeats his goals.
Th: You have come here of your own free will to overcome this
depression, anxiety, work problems, and problems in your
marriage. You said you no longer want to feel depressed. You want
to live a life no longer crippled by anxiety. You want to succeed in
your work finally so you can advance rather than continue to be
bypassed by others. And you said you want to have a loving
relationship with your wife rather than the distant estrangement you
now have. Is this still true? [Point out his goals.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: Although you want to overcome these difficulties and have a better
life, at the same time we see how this self-destructive detachment is
sabotaging your therapy. You detach with your wife and end up
with a detached marriage. You detach at work and end up
unconnected to your goals. You detach here with me, and then you
sabotage your own goals here. [Transference resistance.] Why
would an intelligent man like you want to do that to yourself ?
Pt: I don’t.
Th: You don’t want to sabotage yourself. That is not your intent
[validate the patient], but it is what you are doing. [Point out his
splitting: the difference between what he says and does. The patient
pays attention to what he says (healthy) but ignores what he does
(unhealthy). What he does is his character pathology.] So what can
we do about this detachment here because, as long as you detach,
we will have the same disastrous result you have everywhere else?
Deactivating the Projection of the Patient’s Awareness onto the
Therapist
To avoid experiencing the conflict between his resistance and the
problems it causes, the patient projects his awareness onto the therapist.
That way he can be in conflict with the therapist rather than with his
resistance. To avoid this interpersonal conflict, the therapist must deactivate
the projection of awareness.
1. Deactivate the Projection of Healthy Awareness: A patient
described her self-neglect as something furthering her “spiritual
path.” Then she projected this awareness onto her therapist.
Pt: You probably think this is a problem. [Defense: projection.]
Th: Did you ever think that maybe if you neglect yourself enough, you
might end up in better shape in the next reincarnation? [Mirror her
resistance to block the projection onto the therapist.]
Pt: I actually did have that thought.
Th: What’s a little suffering now if it leads to realization in the next
lifetime? [Mirror the resistance to block the projection of her
healthy awareness onto the therapist.]
Pt: Except I can’t afford to neglect myself now because it’s affecting my
daughter. [She acknowledges her healthy awareness. Feeling and
anxiety rise as she tolerates the conflict between her wish to have a
better life and her defense of self-neglect.]
A patient, married to a verbally abusive husband, projects her awareness
onto the therapist. Notice how the therapist mirrors her defenses to avoid an
interpersonal conflict. As a result, the patient experiences conflict within
herself.
Pt: I know you think that this is self-neglect, but I think you’re wrong.
There’s a virtue to being patient. [Inviting the therapist to talk
about the price of her defense so they could have a battle of wills.]
Th: How wonderful that you have found a solution to your difficulties.
How long would you like to wait? [Mirror her resistance to block
the projection of her healthy awareness onto the therapist.]
Pt: [Rise of anxiety.] It’s not how long I would like to wait. It’s just that
I have to right now. [Defense: helplessness, denying her agency.]
Th: It’s not that you would like to wait. [Mirror her move toward
health.] It’s just that waiting is what you are doing. You are doing
what you don’t like. [Point out her internal conflict.] You can wait
as little as you want, or you can wait as long as you want. [Point
out her agency.] And it may be that a long wait is in your best
interest. [Mirror the resistance.]
Pt: But I can’t keep going this way! [She moves toward health.]
Th: Is it possible you are underestimating yourself? If you’ve waited
thirty years, surely you could wait a few more. [Mirror the
resistance to block her projection.]
Pt: Okay. I get it. I realize I keep myself stuck in the marriage by telling
myself this stuff, but I still don’t see how I’ll get out of this mess.
[The patient lets go of the defense of denial and the transference
resistance.]
2. Deactivate the omnipotent transference: Highly resistant patients
invite the therapist to assume omnipotent responsibility for the
therapy. “I, the patient, am identified with my resistance. You must
identify with my wish to get well. Try to defeat me [as the
resistance] while I try to defeat you. The responsibility for success
lies with you.” But no therapist can be omnipotent.
A patient who identifies with his resistance sees causality incorrectly.
Incorrect causality: “My problems are created by other people or
circumstances—sometimes even by my therapist. My defenses are
good and protect me.”
Correct causality: “I use defenses that create my problems and hurt
me.”
Incorrect causality: “If I identify with my resistance, I will defeat the
therapist, causing him to suffer.”
Correct causality: “If I identify with my resistance, I will defeat my
positive goals, causing myself to suffer.”
A patient, identified with his resistance, can defeat any therapist. He
may respond: “I hear what you are saying, but I still think that shutting
down protects me.” [Metacommunication: “Take an omnipotent position
and try to convince me to do otherwise.”]
Mirror the resistance and then remind the patient of reality: You know
better than I if shutting down is damaging your life. If you shut down, then
obviously there is no way for me to help you with this. And in the end, let’s
face it: the end result here can be failure and suffering, or your success and
freedom. It’s really up to you. [Do not take the omnipotent role and argue
with the patient.]
Therapists who assume omnipotent responsibility for change become
burned out, frustrated, and feel guilty for “failing to help the patient.” Yet
no therapist can succeed if the patient wants to oppose, detach, or remain
uninvolved.
The therapist enacting the omnipotent role
• Becomes active to compensate for the patient’s passivity or
“incapacity”
• Argues with the patient
• Ignores signs of resistance from the patient and tries harder
instead by asking the patient to offer what the patient withholds or
by offering to the patient what the patient withholds
• Provides all the will to engage in the therapeutic task, activity,
emotional involvement, motivation, desire, or curiosity
Frustration in the therapist is often a sign of resistance in the patient.
The therapist may harbor a secret belief that therapy is not succeeding
because she is not good enough. She should ask herself, “What am I giving
that the patient is withholding?” “How am I taking on the omnipotent
transference?”
3. Mobilize the unconscious therapeutic alliance: When the patient
does not let go of his transference resistance, point out how it
defeats his goals. This knowledge mobilizes the patient’s healthy
wish to achieve his goals, a wish that previously was unconscious.
Hence, the term unconscious therapeutic alliance.
Point out causality (the transference resistance will create failure) to
mobilize the patient to turn against the resistance.
Th: As long as you remain helpless, vague, and incapable of saying
what you feel
• we will be unable to get a clear idea of your internal difficulties
and I won’t be able to help you.
• I cannot understand you or be helpful to you.
• our work will remain in limbo.
• this process will end in defeat.
• you will not reach the goal you set for yourself.
Invite the patient to assess the price of his resistance.
Th: If you avoid these feelings, what impact will that have on your goal
to have more emotionally intimate relationships?
Mobilize the unconscious therapeutic alliance by noting the conflict
between the patient’s goals and his transference resistance.
Th: As long as you have this need to control, we cannot arrive at the
core of your problems. You decided to come here to understand
your problems. But you censor yourself. You sabotage your own
goal and defeat yourself. If you have this need to defeat yourself,
why should we meet here and have this interview? (Troendle 2005,
my translation)
Th: And now you say you believe that you deserve to be punished by
your wife for thirty-one years. Yet we see that it is not only your
wife, but you have punished yourself for thirty-one years. You
chose her. You stayed with her. And you have continuously invited
her to punish you. This is a profoundly destructive element in your
personality. Now by punishing yourself and even trying to convince
me why you should do so, we see the destructive part of your
personality.
Pt: I can see I am hard on myself.
Th: Hard on yourself? This is the cancer of your life. This is how you
have been making yourself depressed for decades. And you can
continue to punish yourself the rest of your life if you want and
remain a depressed, lonely man. But there is no way therapy can
succeed if this is the choice you make.
Pt: I don’t want to depend on you.
Th: That’s okay. You don’t have to. You have every right not to depend
on me and not to let me get close to your intimate feelings. That
may not be something you want to do. [Deactivate the defiant
transference resistance.] Obviously, you have been able to keep
men at a distance for many years and, if it is in your best interests
to do that with me, that’s what you should do. It’s just that as long
as you maintain this wall between you and me, then I will be just
another useless man in your life, this will be a useless therapy, and
your loneliness and isolation will continue.
The transference resistance sabotages a healing relationship,
perpetuating the patient’s suffering. Point out how it dooms the therapy to
fail, perpetuates his misery, frustrates his own goal, guarantees he will
remain a lonely man, sets him up for self-defeat, and ensures that this
therapy will end up in the graveyard of failed relationships (H. Davanloo,
supervision 2002–2004).
Problems When Addressing the Transference Resistance:
Premature Confrontation
Do not confront the transference resistance until the patient can observe
and pay attention to his transference resistance, and see causality—the
resistance creates his presenting problems. Premature confrontation will
create a misalliance. Identified with the resistance, he will believe you are
attacking him as a person. He no longer experiences you as his ally against
attacking defenses. First, identify, clarify, and separate him from the
transference resistance. Then confront it.
Premature confrontation of the transference resistance results in
iatrogenic rage toward the therapist. This creates several kinds of
misalliance: (1) depressed patients “flatten out” or become depressed; (2)
fragile patients become defiant or project; (3) patients with functional
disorders suffer increased somatization; and (4) highly resistant patients
become defiant. Exploring iatrogenic rage deepens the misalliance.
[Metacommunication: “I did not hear you confronting my behaviors. I
heard you attacking my very person.”] This rage is based on a
misunderstanding, not on unconscious transference feelings.
If a misalliance occurs due to premature confrontation, apologize for the
misunderstanding to repair the alliance. Then clarify the therapeutic task,
his goals, and the defenses that are preventing him from reaching his goals,
and differentiate him from the transference resistance. Once he realizes that
you are confronting his resistance, not his person, he will recognize you are
trying to free him from self-sabotaging behaviors. Then, confronting the
transference resistance deepens the alliance. The greater the differentiation
and the higher rise of complex feelings toward the therapist, the more you
can confront the transference resistance.
Compassionately addressing the transference resistance flies in the face
of our socialization. We are socialized not to interrupt defenses but to
reinforce them! Think of the family gathering where Uncle Peter brings up
a taboo subject. Suddenly Mother stands up and provides the defense:
“Okay everyone. Let’s go into the dining room for dinner.” This is valuable
in the living room. But colluding with defenses is destructive in the therapy
office. Interrupt the transference resistance so you can co-create a
therapeutic alliance. The therapist and patient must be willing to experience
anxiety for the sake of their mutual growth. We can avoid anxiety or face it
together to deal with feelings. “To treat the patient with true compassion
involves overcoming our own internal resistance to fostering adaptive
discomfort” (N. Kuhn 2011, personal communication).
Noninterpretive Focus on the Transference Resistance
Interpretation often supports the defense of intellectualization. This does
not lead to change (H. Davanloo, supervision 2002–2004; Reich 1933). In
fact, it can strengthen the transference resistance. The passive patient waits
to be cured by the therapist’s interpretations. The defiant patient
experiences an interpretation as the therapist’s attempt to control him. The
uninvolved patient can listen to interpretations while remaining uninvolved.
Interpretation enacts the omnipotent transference. “If I listen to his
words, I’ll be healed magically by his efforts, not my own.” In the
transference resistance, the patient uses words to enact a pathological
relationship. For instance, he might say, “Yeah, that’s my goal here, but I’m
not totally committed to it.” By his detached tone of voice and posture, he
enacts the transference (Havens 1986, 1993)! Since he uses words for the
purpose of enactment, interventions must be enactive. Use enactive,
noninterpretive interventions to deactivate the transference resistance.
SUMMARY
When we explore feelings, the highly resistant patient enacts a past
relationship to keep the therapist at a distance—the transference resistance.
Shift from defense work to transference resistance work. Remind the patient
of his goals and desires. Emphasize your role as his ally to help him achieve
his goals. This establishes a positive working alliance, the most potent
factor in therapy outcome. Remind the patient that his healthy goals conflict
with his resistance, which will defeat him. Instead, you and he can join
forces so he can achieve what he longs for.
Help the patient see the destructive impact on his life when he avoids
closeness with you. As you do, let his experience of complex feelings
continue to rise. Mobilize him to let go of the transference resistance.
Remind him of his positive goals. Ask questions of the unconscious such as,
“What is the crime that makes you punish yourself this way?” Respond to
cues from the unconscious therapeutic alliance. Focus on his longings for
freedom while confronting his self-destructive defenses to maximize the
tension between him and his resistance. Eventually, an unlocking of
unconscious feelings begins.
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Benoit, C. (1990). Management of transference resistance in Davanloo’s
intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy. International Journal of
Short-Term Psychotherapy, 5, 277–296.
Benoit, C. (1991). Management of transference resistance in Davanloo’s
intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy, part II. International
Journal of Short-Term Psychotherapy, 6, 145–161.
Davanloo, H. (2000). Head-on collision with the resistance. In Intensive
short-term dynamic psychotherapy (pp. 235–253). New York: Wiley.
Kalpin, A. (1994). Effective use of Davanloo’s “head-on collision.”
International Journal of Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy, 9, 19–36.
T
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Breakthrough to the Unconscious
hrough the restructuring of anxiety and defense, the therapist helps
the patient develop the capacity to bear her feelings to the greatest
degree possible with regulated anxiety. When the therapist has
helped the patient turn against enough defenses and resistances, feelings
rise in the body until the patient experiences an impulse in the body,
signaling that access to unconscious feelings is possible. The therapist helps
the patient face these feelings as deeply as possible toward the figure with
whom she is in conflict. When the patient experiences this rage without
defenses, unconscious rage emerges: a fantasy of killing this figure. The
therapist encourages the patient to picture this fantasy in her imagination
while feeling her rage. When the patient does so in fantasy, the patient’s
body relaxes with the passage of the rage.
At this moment, the patient often begins to feel a wave of guilt and
painful feelings. During this passage of feelings, the image of one of the
patient’s early caretakers comes to mind. This transfer of images tells us
that the conscious rage toward a current figure is connected to unconscious
rage toward a past figure. This transfer of images is the beginning of what
we call the unlocking of the unconscious.
We encourage the patient to face these feelings toward the earlier figure.
As the patient feels those powerful feelings where they really belong,
memories emerge, allowing us to see into the patient’s repressed
unconscious life. When the patient can feel these feelings deeply toward the
people toward whom they belonged in the past, these feelings do not have
to be directed toward others in the patient’s current life. Once the patient
can feel her unconscious guilt over her unconscious rage, this guilt no
longer drives the patient’s self-punishment. The more deeply the patient can
experience her powerful mixed feelings toward her caretakers, the more she
can embrace all of her inner life. Thereby, she becomes a more integrated
person and acquires a more integrated and realistic view of other people.
She no longer needs to use anxiety or defenses to cover her feelings.
Although earlier phases of the work can cause significant symptom change,
significant character change results from the unlocking of repressed,
unconscious feelings.
STAGES IN THE PHASE OF PORTRAYAL
When the patient’s unconscious therapeutic alliance becomes stronger
than her resistance, feelings break through, signaling the beginning of an
unlocking of the unconscious. At this point, the patient experiences the
impulse in her body. Perhaps her hand forms a fist or we see a choking
impulse in her hands.
Stage One: Invite the Patient to Portray the Impulse
Once the patient experiences the impulse in her hands, her defenses
have dropped, and the unconscious is accessible. At that point, invite the
patient to portray the impulse in her imagination.
Th: If that impulse went out on him, if you were out of control like a
wild animal, how do you picture that impulse going out onto his
body?
Pt: You mean if I really did it? I never would.
Th: Of course, but in thoughts, words, and fantasy, in your mind how do
you picture that rage going out onto him?
The patient pictures in fantasy how her rage would go out onto the
person who hurt her. The therapist gently encourages the patient to picture
the image in her mind. When the impulse of her murderous rage has passed,
her body will relax, and tension will go out of her body.
Stage Two: Invite the Patient to Face the Complex Feelings
With the passage of the murderous impulse, a wave of painful feelings
may spontaneously arise toward the murdered figure. Encourage the patient
to face those feelings as deeply as possible. As she experiences those
painful feelings, the unconscious will unlock: the image of an earlier figure
in her life spontaneously appears in her mind.
With some patients the complex, mixed feelings will flow readily
immediately. If not, encourage the patient to picture what she does with the
murdered body, how she prepares it for burial in a loving way, what kind of
service she holds, and how she says her final goodbye to the murdered
figure. This kind of picturing helps the patient access the painful, mixed
feelings and put them into words.
Stage Three: Unlocking of the Unconscious
The patient experiences how the feelings toward the current figure are
transferred from feelings toward an earlier figure in her life. As she
experiences those complex feelings toward the original figure, memories
come to mind that help her see how unconscious feelings from the past have
driven her recent behavior and symptoms. Since her defenses are out of the
way, the therapist only needs to encourage the patient to face her feelings as
deeply as possible and to elaborate on the memories that arise.
Once the unlocking of the unconscious occurs, the process unfolds
naturally with little assistance from the therapist. However, therapist
mistakes can prevent the unlocking. We will address below the primary
problems that occur.
PROBLEMS BEFORE THE STAGE OF PORTRAYAL
Problems often occur during the state of portrayal because the therapist
has failed to properly assess the patient’s responses while inviting feeling.
The following examples show common errors in assessment while inviting
feelings that will prevent an unlocking of unconscious feelings.
Mistakes in Focusing on Feeling
Patients do not get to a breakthrough to unconscious feelings if those
feelings have not risen enough or defenses and anxiety have not been
sufficiently restructured. To get a sufficient rise of the feeling, maintain a
focus on the feeling, the experience of the feeling, and the experience of
impulse—in that order. When the patient reveals the experience of impulse
through a movement in her body, the rise of the feeling and drop in defense
and resistance is enough for a breakthrough to occur.
Skipping the Step of Labeling the Feeling
Before exploring the patient’s impulse, first help the patient let go of
defenses so she can label her feeling and experience it.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for throwing you out of the car?
Pt: I think it was really terrible of him to do that. [Defense:
intellectualization. The patient has not yet labeled her feeling:
anger.]
Th: What is it you want to do to him? [The therapist mistakenly jumps
to portrayal when the patient cannot label her feeling, experience
it, or experience her impulse.]
Solution:
Th: I agree it was terrible, but that still doesn’t say what you feel toward
him for doing that. If you don’t cover your feeling with a thought,
what is the feeling toward him? [Address the defense, and then
invite the feeling to maintain the focus. The patient must be able to
experience her feeling and impulse before the unconscious can
unlock.]
Skipping the Step of Experiencing the Feeling
Before inviting the patient to portray her impulse, she must first be able
to label her feeling and let go of enough defenses that she can experience
her feeling physically in her body. In the following example, the therapist
mistakenly invites the patient to portray her impulse before the patient is
able to experience the anger physically.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for throwing you out of the car?
Pt: I’m angry with him.
Th: How do you experience that feeling physically in your body?
Pt: [Sitting still with flat affect.] I want to run that car right over him.
[The patient does not describe how she experiences her anger:
defense. Her lack of affect reveals that she is either detaching from
her emotion or distancing herself from the therapist, either of which
would prevent her from getting access to her deeper feelings.]
Th: How do you picture that in your mind? [The therapist jumps to
portrayal when the patient cannot describe how she experiences the
anger or impulse physically in her body. This is an insufficient rise
in feeling for a portrayal.]
Solution:
Th: You say that in such a detached way. Do you notice how you detach
from your rage right now? [Address the defense so she can begin to
experience her feeling and impulse.]
Skipping the Step of Experiencing the Impulse
For the patient to have access to unconscious feelings, she must have
turned against enough defenses that she can label her feeling, experience it
physically, and experience her impulse. In the following example, the
patient does not experience her impulse.
Th: How do you experience that anger physically in your body?
Pt: I feel a heat coming up from my body going out to my arms.
Th: What’s the impulse that comes with that feeling?
Pt: They want to grab. [Her arms lay in her lap limp. Defense against
the experience of her impulse.]
Th: How do you experience that impulse?
Pt: I don’t. [Defense against the experience of her impulse. No
breakthrough to the unconscious is possible with that defense.]
Th: If those arms grabbed him, how do you picture that in your mind?
[The therapist jumps to portrayal and ignores the defense against
experiencing the impulse.]
Solution:
Th: You say you want to grab him, but then you go limp. Do you notice
that? What will happen if you keep going limp in the face of your
rage? [Address the defense and help her see the price so she will
turn against it and experience the impulse.]
In each of these cases, the patient may comply and visualize her rage
but without feeling it. This is not a breakthrough to rage, but
intellectualizing about it. The patient remains detached from the physical
experience of her feelings. By doing so, she merely repeats her habitual
defenses. This is not helpful. In these examples, the therapist skips one or
two of the steps of feeling activation: (1) address defenses and invite the
feeling until the patient can label it; (2) address defenses and invite the
feeling until the patient can describe how she experiences the feeling in her
body; and (3) address defenses and invite feeling until the patient
experiences the impulse physically in her body. If you bypass any of these
steps, you will not mobilize enough of the feeling to get a breakthrough to
the unconscious. The patient must be able to label her feeling, experience it
physically in her body, and experience the impulse associated with the
feeling for a breakthrough to occur.
Skipping the Step of Experiencing the Feeling in the Body
Impulsive patients often skip the experience of their feeling to act it out
instead. The therapist must block the use of acting out, and then build the
patient’s affect tolerance to make the unconscious available. In the
following example, the therapist mistakenly explores the patient’s impulse,
when the patient avoids the physical experience of his feeling.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for taking your girlfriend?
Pt: I feel like I could explode! [Yells. Defense: discharge. Primitive
somatic representation of emotion. Unable to label his feeling as an
abstract state: anger.]
Th: And what is that feeling?
Pt: Rage.
Th: How do you experience that rage in your body?
Pt: [Begins punching with his fists and stomping the floor with his feet.
The patient goes to impulse immediately, bypassing the experience
of his rage. Impulsive patients often act out an impulse to avoid the
internal experience of their rage. Bypassing this phase prevents the
patient from building his capacity to bear feelings at higher levels
without acting out.]
Th: And if that went out on him, how do you picture it? [The therapist
mistakenly encourages the defense of acting out.]
Solution:
Th: I see that’s what you want to do. You want to get this rage out of
you by moving rather than to let yourself feel it inside. If you don’t
shake this feeling out of your body, could you let your feet stay still
on the floor, and leave your arms on the armrest? [Block the defense
of discharge.] How do you experience this rage in your body now?
[Build his capacity to pay attention to and experience his rage
without acting out or discharging.]
An impulsive patient in this situation will vent most of his rage
externally rather than experience it internally. This will prevent an
unlocking of the unconscious. The visualization allows him to engage in the
same acting out and discharge that gets him into trouble in his outside life.
It is not helpful. Any defenses you do not address earlier will prevent an
unlocking later. They can stop the patient from feeling the impulse,
portraying the rage, or experiencing the mixed feelings toward the damaged
figure and having the unlocking.
Mistakes in Focusing on Defense
In moderately resistant and fragile patients, mistakes can occur due to
problems in the phase of inviting the feeling and defense identification. In
highly resistant patients, problems usually occur because the therapist has
trouble addressing character defenses and the transference resistance. If
character defenses and the transference resistance are still operating, no
breakthrough to the unconscious is possible. If the patient is enacting his
identification with a past figure, he cannot face his rage toward that figure.
A patient who was angry with her detached father experienced an
impulse toward him.
Th: How does that rage go out onto him?
Pt: I just feel indifferent. [Character defense.]
Th: If you don’t cover it with indifference, how does the rage go out on
him? [The therapist explores feeling but ignores the patient’s
identification with her indifferent father, a defense that will prevent
a breakthrough of rage toward the father.]
Solution:
Th: Now you become the emotionally dead daughter, indifferent to
yourself just as your father was indifferent to you. But are we here
to cover yourself with his façade, or are we here to find out who
you really are under this façade of indifference?
Deactivating a character defense can be the pathway to breakthroughs
with the highly resistant patient. If feelings do not break through, shift from
defense identification to transference resistance identification. What role is
the patient playing and what role is the patient inviting you to play to avoid
an intrapsychic conflict? (See chapter 13.)
Defenses against Experiencing the Impulse
As soon as the patient begins to experience the impulse, defenses may
come in. The following examples illustrate how different defenses can
prevent the patient from experiencing his impulse. This patient just
expressed the impulse to choke her ex-boyfriend.
Instant Repression
In the following vignette, the therapist helps the patient see and let go of
the defense of instant repression.
Th: How do you experience that impulse in your hands?
Pt: [Having just described her wish to strangle an ex-boyfriend who
tried to rape her, the patient’s hands form a circle as if they are
around his neck.] I don’t. [Her hands drop.]
Th: Do you notice how you dropped your hands? Do you notice how
you just dropped your power? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: I didn’t, but I do now.
Th: If you let those hands power up, could we take a look at that
impulse? [Encourage the patient to turn against the defense and
experience her impulse instead.]
Negation
In the following vignette, the therapist blocks the patient’s defense of
negation so that feelings can rise.
Th: What do you want to do with that fist?
Pt: I don’t want to do anything with it. [Defense: denial. The patient’s
fist drops.]
Th: And yet there was a fist there. If you form the fist again, what do
you notice feeling when you let yourself feel your power?
Pt: I feel some heat rising up in me. [Return of feeling.]
Th: If those fists did what you would never do, how do you picture
those fists going out on him, in your imagination? [I offer the
patient the defense of displacement during this first portrayal.
During later portrayals, she will be able to acknowledge her
impulse as her own without this graded approach.]
Minimization
In the following example, the therapist helps the patient see the defense
and also the price: it creates her symptoms. This is essential in this phase of
the work, so the patient will completely let go of the defense, allowing the
feelings to rise.
Th: How do you experience that impulse in your hands?
Pt: It’s not an impulse to choke him, just to push him. [The patient uses
the defense of minimization. If not addressed, this defense would
prevent a breakthrough to the unconscious.]
Th: Now you water down your impulse. Do you notice how you hold
yourself back now? Isn’t this the same pattern that has been getting
you in trouble? You held yourself back just before you would have
won first prize in the karate contest. You held yourself back so you
wouldn’t surpass your twin sister at graduation. And now you hold
yourself back again. But if you hold back your rage now, it will just
come back on you again, and we won’t overcome this tendency to
inhibit yourself. Are we here to hold you back? Or are we here to
overcome that self-destructive habit? [Label the defense, then
confront the patient with the self-destructive impact of the defense,
and then invite her to make a choice: continue with a selfdestructive defense or turn against it now.]
Pt: I’m here to stop doing that. [The patient turns against the defense.]
Th: If you don’t hold back this rage and those fists, how do they come
out on him in your imagination?
Somatization
In the following vignette, the therapist helps the patient see the defense
of somatization so he can let go of the defense, allowing the rage to be felt
toward the other person.
Th: How do you experience that impulse in your hands?
Pt: [Hands drop.] I’m having trouble breathing. I feel like my throat is
closing up. I need to get my inhaler. I think I’m having an allergic
reaction. [The patient somatizes.]
Th: Do you notice how you start to choke just after your hands looked
like they were going to choke him? Do you notice how the impulse
goes on your throat instead of going onto his? [Point out the link
between the rageful impulse and the somatization. If not addressed,
the defense of somatization prevents a breakthrough of murderous
rage toward someone else since it keeps going back on the patient
instead.]
Depression
In the following vignette, the therapist identifies and blocks the defense
of self-attack, which makes the patient depressed. If not addressed, that
defense and the resulting depression would prevent an unlocking of the
unconscious.
Th: How do you experience that impulse in your hands?
Pt: [Slumps in chair. Tension leaves the body.] I’m such a terrible
person to feel this toward you. After everything you did for me,
here I am wanting to hit you. I am an ungrateful piece of crap.
[Turning of rage onto the self makes him depressed.]
Th: Wow! Do you see how the rage is going back onto you now? See
how that old mechanism is coming in here to hurt you? If you don’t
protect me and hurt yourself instead, can we turn the rage toward
me and see how you experience that impulse toward me?
Defenses against Picturing the Impulse
Sometimes patients experience the impulse and declare what they want
to do, but then ward off portraying their murderous wish. In each case,
address the defense. Otherwise, the patient will not portray the murderous
wish, and no unlocking of the unconscious will occur. The following
examples illustrate different defenses patients can use to avoid portraying
their impulses.
Using Reality as a Defense: “But I would never do that.”
A patient often will bring in reality to ward off his feelings. In response,
the therapist must validate the patient’s perception of reality and then
encourage the patient to explore another aspect of reality: his feelings and
impulses. When the therapist invites the patient to face an impulse, the
patient may respond by denying that he would ever engage in that impulse
in reality.
Th: Of course, in reality you never would, but we are not talking about
reality. In fantasy, in your mind, how do you picture this if in your
imagination you lost complete control of yourself ?
Projection of Will (Compliance): “Do I have to?”
If the projection of will has not been completely restructured earlier, it
may emerge again when the therapist invites the patient to face his impulse.
At this point in the work, the therapist will confront the patient’s use of
projection and its price. Then the therapist will invite the patient to face his
impulse. When the patient asks if she has to look at her inner life, the
therapist will intervene as follows.
Th: Of course not. You can avoid facing this murderous rage toward
your ex-husband. [Deactivate the projection of will.] But as long as
you keep avoiding this murderous rage toward your ex-husband,
what will happen? [Point out the price of the defense.]
Pt: I’ll just stay depressed.
Th: Right. And you can stay depressed another five years if you want. I
can’t stop that, but then I have to ask you, “Why perpetuate your
suffering this way?” You can face this rage toward him in fantasy,
or turn it on yourself in reality. But then, who suffers? [Point out
the price of the defense.]
Pt: Me.
Th: Are we here to help you perpetuate your suffering or bring it to an
end? [Invite her to let go of the defense.]
Pt: Bring it to an end.
Th: If we bring it to an end, how do you picture this rage going out onto
him, if you lost total control like a wild animal?
Denial: “I just don’t feel that way.”
When the therapist invites the patient to face his impulse, the patient
may suddenly deny the impulse the therapist can see in the patient’s body.
The therapist can point out the evidence that flies in the face of the patient’s
denial and then point out the price. In the following vignette, the therapist
challenges the patient’s denial and reveals its price so the patient can let go
of his denial and face the impulse he denied.
Th: Now you try to erase your feelings you have described over the past
twenty minutes. You said you feel angry with her for harassing you
through the courts. You said you feel heat in your body. Your hands
formed fists. Then you said you wanted to hit her and silence her.
Then who do you silence here? [Challenge the defense.]
Pt: I guess you’d say me. [Projection.]
Th: Who would you say? [Block the projection.]
Pt: Me.
Th: Exactly. Yet who is it you want to silence?
Pt: Carol.
Th: So if you don’t silence yourself, how does this rage go out onto her
in your imagination?
If denial comes in at this point, after the phase of defense identification,
challenge the defense directly.
Defenses against the Experience of Complex Mixed Feelings
After the patient has pictured her murderous fantasy, defenses can ward
off the experience of complex mixed feelings. Handling these defenses is
essential. Otherwise, a breakthrough only to rage will encourage the patient
to engage in splitting (Klein 1975a, 1975b). She will view others only in
terms of her rage, denying what was good and loveable in them. This helps
her avoid the unconscious guilt and grief, which have driven her selfpunishment. It also perpetuates splitting within herself and splitting of her
images of others (Grotstein 1985). Thus, resolving the defenses against
bearing the guilt over unconscious rage is essential if we are to get character
change.
Vignette: Continued Rage as a Defense
The patient has killed her father off in her imagination but continues to
beat the body after he is clearly dead. This continued rage is a defense
against facing the complex feelings over the murder she has just portrayed.
Notice how the therapist blocks the defense and invites the patient to face
her warded-off complex feelings.
Pt: And then I take a baseball bat to his head again.
Th: But you already flattened it. You cut his head off. You cut out his
heart and mutilated the genitals of this father who molested you. He
is dead. What does he look like now that you have finally killed
him in this picture? [Block the defense of attacking a dead body as
if it is not dead. Invite her to look at her crime to access her
complex, mixed feelings.]
Pt: It’s pretty ugly. [Vague.]
Th: What do you see?
Pt: [Tears form in her eyes as she describes his body and the guilt
emerges.]
Vignette: Detaching
After having portrayed the impulse toward a loved one, the patient may
envision walking away from the body and, thus, from her feelings. Notice
how the therapist points out the defense and its price. In this example, the
patient has killed off her father in her imagination and described his body.
Pt: And then I just walk away. To hell with him!
Th: You walk away from your feelings, but isn’t that obeying him? He
said, “Let me molest you while you walk away from your feelings.”
And now you obey him, but are we here to walk away from your
feelings or face them? Who is going to win this time, you or he?
[Point out her defense (identification), its price, and encourage her
to turn against it.]
Pt: Me.
Th: If you don’t walk away from your feelings, because you loved him
too at one time, what do you do with his body if you honor all of
your feelings?
Pt: I would wash it and prepare it for burial.
Th: How do you imagine washing his body in a loving way?
[Encourage the patient to face her complex mixed emotions toward
a father who betrayed her.]
Pt: [Cries.]
Vignette: Devaluation
Sometimes patients avoid their complex mixed feelings by devaluing
the murdered figure. Notice how the therapist identifies the defense and
points out its price.
In this example, the patient has imagined murdering her much-older
brother who molested her for six years. He was her closest relationship
during those years due to the neglect in her family. She has just described
what his body looks like after she had killed him, gutted him, cut out his
penis, and put it in his mouth.
Th: What is the feeling in you as you look at his body?
Pt: I just want to put it in a trash bag and put him out in the trash.
Th: Just like you did with your feelings for so many years. Even when
you told your mother about his molestation, she said, in effect, put
your feelings in the trash and you did. But if we don’t trash your
feelings, if we treat all of them with respect and care, what do you
do with his body to prepare it for burial? [Point out the defense, it
price, and help her turn against it.]
Pt: I felt really abandoned when he got married. [Unconscious
therapeutic alliance.]
Th: Of course, because you felt he had been married to you as a little
girl. You had been his secret wife.
Pt: [Sobs.]
Vignette: Defenses of Splitting and Devaluation to Avoid the
Experience of Guilt
Sometimes the patient avoids her guilt over murderous rage by judging
the person she killed in her imagination. Rather than feel guilt over her
murderous rage, she judges and devalues him, saying he deserved the rage
and not other mixed feelings. This defense against facing her mixed feelings
means that she will continue to punish herself. In this example, the patient
has just described her murderous rage toward an ex-husband who had an
affair.
Th: What’s the feeling now as you look at his dead body?
Pt: He deserved it. [Defense. She does not describe her feelings.]
Th: This man you loved, with whom you raised children, with whom
you had been happy, deserved to be killed? Deserved to have his
belly slit open? Deserved to have his genitals cut off? Deserved to
be run over by a car? Is that true? Or is that a way you avoid the
complex feelings you have toward this man you loved with all your
heart?
Pt: [Tears.] It just hurts so much to remember that.
Th: But we mustn’t forget any part of you or your feelings. Otherwise,
you leave this room a heartless, unfeeling criminal, and we know
that’s not the whole truth of you.
Pt: That’s true.
Th: So what’s the feeling as you look at his dead eyes looking up at
you?
Pt: I want to say, “I’m sorry.”
Th: How do you tell him?
Pt: [Cries.]
Vignette: Avoiding the Eyes to Avoid the Experience of Guilt
After having pictured the impulse, the patient may avoid looking at the
murdered figure or his eyes. This is a defense against experiencing his guilt
and mixed feelings. Notice how the therapist identifies the defense and
encourages the patient to face his mixed feelings. In this example, the
patient has just pictured the murder of his father who physically abused
him.
Th: What is the feeling as you look at his eyes?
Pt: He’s face down. [Defense.]
Th: If you turn him over?
Pt: His eyes are closed. [Defense.]
Th: If they are open?
Pt: I don’t look at them. [Defense.]
Th: If you don’t avoid his eyes, what is the feeling in you as you look at
his dead eyes looking up at you lifelessly?
Pt: Well, now I feel guilty.
Th: Let yourself feel that guilt as deeply as possible.
Patients avoid looking at the eyes to avoid the experience of guilt.
Sometimes patients gouge out the eyes of the figure to avoid being seen and
to avoid experiencing their guilt.
Vignette: Identification with the Object of Her Rage
The patient can avoid facing mixed feelings by identifying with the
murdered figure. The therapist must take care to identify this defense, or
else the patient will suffer severe symptoms. In this example, the patient has
just pictured killing her ex-lover in her imagination. She is looking in his
face while experiencing powerful painful feelings.
Th: Whose face comes to mind right now?
Pt: Mine. [Identification with the murdered body.]
Th: So it is your body you have murdered. What is it you do with your
body?
Pt: I burn it.
Th: Isn’t this what you’ve done in your life—burn it up? [Point out how
she turns the rage onto herself and the price of doing so.]
Pt: [Cries.]
Th: If you don’t turn this murderous impulse back onto you, whose face
comes to mind?
Pt: My mother’s. [Massive wave of grief and guilt unfolds.]
The patient turned the rage toward her mother onto herself to avoid
facing the complex, mixed feelings she felt toward her mother.
INVITING FEELINGS AND BREAKTHROUGH TO
FEELING WITH A MODERATELY RESISTANT PATIENT
The following transcript continues the case we read in chapter 1, where
the patient had turned against his defenses and experienced a rageful
impulse toward his doctor.
Vignette Four (minutes 38–42)
Now we will continue during the phase of the breakthrough to
unconscious feelings.
Th: How do you tear her to pieces? If you’re totally honest, how do you
tear her to pieces? [I invite him to picture this impulse in his mind
while feeling the rage in his body.]
Pt: Just like, you know, disassembly. It’s just a disassembly issue, you
know [makes a tear-apart gesture]. And, again, it’s like, you know,
I would never do this.
Th: But this is the fantasy. [Remind the patient to imagine this impulse
in his mind, in fantasy, thoughts, and ideas.]
Pt: This is fantasy.
Th: If you go totally berserk—
Pt: This is fantasy.
Th: You disassemble her. How do you disassemble her? How do you
tear her apart?
Pt: I just grab the arms and aaaaarrgh! [A tear-apart gesture.]
Th: Tear her arms.
Pt: Tear her arms off, yeah.
Th: What else?
Pt: [Sighs.] Tear her head off. Yeah that was just—Tear! Tear! Tear!
Tear! If that was just totally in fantasy, I would never, ever do this
to anybody. [Remember how he had no feeling earlier below the
head: an unconscious identification with the body whose head is
torn off.]
Th: Obviously, but in fantasy you tear her arms off, you tear her head
off, you— [Encourage him to visualize the sadistic impulse as
vividly as possible so all his rage goes out onto the doctor in
fantasy rather than onto his body in reality.]
Pt: Yeah, I just really rage beyond belief.
Th: And just picture that. You tear her arms off. You tear her head off.
What else? What else do you tear?
Pt: Legs.
Th: Mmm-hmmm. Tear her legs off ?
Pt: I just grab them and just snap! I mean, I just snap! Snap! Snap!
Snap! Snap! Yeah, it’s just, you know.
Th: Tear her legs off.
Pt: Just brute force, snap! You know, no knives, no guns, nothing of that
nature, it’s just snap!
Th: It’s just tearing.
Pt: Just tear! Tear the body apart because that’s what’s been happening
to me. My body’s been torn apart. [The patient links the sadistic
impulse to his symptoms.]
During the next several minutes (minutes 47–56), he gazes at the head
and eventually makes the connection to his mother, an emotionally
disturbed woman who ignored the patient’s feelings. I note that he was
enraged with his mother and unconsciously wanted to tear her to pieces too,
which led to a pattern of tearing himself to pieces. All of which reveals his
love for her, his guilt, and his rage. After a brief passage of guilt, the
impulse of rage emerges toward his mother. We resume the session.
Th: But if we’re completely honest, because you’ve been tearing
yourself to pieces for years.
Pt: Yes.
Th: And now we know who it’s really been that you wanted to tear up.
[His mother.]
Pt: Yeah.
Th: If we face this totally honestly.
Pt: Yeah.
Th: Because we need to make sure that the right person—that the rage
really goes where it belongs—
Pt: Yeah.
Th: And not on your body.
Pt: Yeah.
Th: Because if it keeps going on your body, you could get killed.
Pt: That’s true, that’s true.
Th: If you totally unleash—I know it’s very uncomfortable to face this
honestly, but if we really, for the first time, face it totally honestly
and all the rage went on her body, how do you picture that,
physically, if we’re just totally honest. If it’s all going on her body
now, not yours. How do you picture it?
Second Breakthrough of the Murderous Rage
At this point we see the unlocking of unconscious repressed feelings.
Now we understand that the patient’s rage toward the physician was
connected to unconscious rage toward his mother. With this shift from the
physician to his mother, the unlocking begins. We invite the patient to
experience these feelings as deeply as possible so we can identify the
repressed feelings that have been driving his anxiety and defenses.
Pt: Arrrrrgh-arrrrrgh-arrrrgh! Same thing again. Want to grab, just want
to shake, just want to say, “Why don’t you listen! Tell you I’m not
feeling good. I don’t feel right. Why don’t you listen? Why do you
just tell me there’s nothing wrong, everything’s okay. You’re fine,
you know, I’m the person who’s sick. There’s nothing wrong with
you, you know. You’re perfectly okay.” Yeah. And look at the
hands, look at the hands.
Th: And what do the hands want to do?
Pt: The hands just want to grab. They just want to grab. They want to
bang. It’s just like, you know— “Why are you trying to control?
Why are you trying to lie and tell me that you have to do this,
people are watching you. Why are you making up stuff, you know,
to say that you have to behave better, you have to do this, you have
to that, you know. Why are you trying to control me so damn
much?”
Th: If all that rage in your head goes out to your hands onto her, how do
you picture that? If there are no words, but just let your hands do all
the talking, what do your hands do to her body? If you let yourself
feel this completely—
Pt: Arrrrrrrrgh! Arrrrgh, boy. Again, I just grab. I just grab. I just grab
so hard. I just grab so damn hard and say, “Why don’t you let me
go! You have to let me go!”
Th: So, if you don’t hold onto your rage anymore, but let it go right into
her, how do you picture your hands letting go of all that rage onto
her?
Pt: Just grabbing, just shaking, just saying, you know, “Let me go! Let
me go! Let me GO!”
While experiencing his murderous rage toward his mother, he
spontaneously remembers his mother’s death. Just before she died, she
yelled at him, accusing him of abandoning her when he had spent an
afternoon seeing some friends. He sobs while remembering his pain and
hers, and his inability to heal her pain.
Vignette Five (minutes 62–73)
We return to experiencing the full extent of his murderous rage.
Th: If you let all this pain in you go out through your arms onto her,
how do you finally finish her off ?
Pt: Arrrrgh! Ah-haaaah! Ahhhh! Tear her apart. Just tear her apart. I
don’t even see any blood. It’s just yank! Tear! “Just get out of my
life! Get it over with! Get rid of it!”
Th: How do you tear her apart?
Pt: Just grab the arms, grab hard, and just yank! Just yank! Just yank!
Just pull hard! Pull hard! Pull hard! Pull really hard.
Th: What have you yanked off ?
Pt: Arms. Yanked the arms off. Yanked the head off. Yeah, got the head
off. Arrrrgh.
Th: Anything else?
Pt: Maybe grab the breasts, just yank!
Th: Yank the breasts off.
Pt: Yank the breasts off. Just yank! Yank! Yank!
Th: Uhm-hmmm. And what else? If you’re totally berserk—
Pt: Totally berserk.
Th: No restraints.
Pt: No restraints, no restraints.
Th: The restraints are over.
Pt: The restraints are over. Sexual attack, I don’t know, not attack, I
don’t—
Th: No restraints.
Pt: No restraints, no restraints, I—
Th: Sexually, how do you attack? [Emergence of fusion of his sexual
and murderous impulses.]
Pt: I just go in, I just fing. I just go, go, go, go, go! And just release!
Arrrrgh! I just release! Release! “Held me back so long! You can’t
date! You can’t do this,” you know. You’re just constrained. You
know, “you can’t have relationships. You know, you just, you’re not
allowed to do that, you know. No, you can’t do that! No, you can’t
do that, you know. You can’t have girls. You can’t date girls. You
can’t do anything with girls, you know, that’s just not—you know,
you have to—you know. You just—you know. Grandmother
doesn’t like this, you know. You have to conform, you know. You
have to not do this. You have to not do that, you know. You have to
restrain yourself.”
He recounts an incident illustrating this problem during high school.
Th: Once you’ve gone, and gone, and gone, and gone, and released,
Pt: Yeah.
Th: Anything else you do, if we’re totally honest with your anger, on
her body? Anything else?
Pt: I think there would be—I would stab, knife, and just— [Makes
several stabbing motions.]
Th: Where would you stab her?
Pt: Chest/upper body. Just throw it in, just go, go, go, go, go, go, go! [A
symbolic rape.]
Th: Anything else?
Pt: Beat her rear end.
Th: How do you beat her rear end?
Pt: Belt. It’s, you know. “You’ve been in control, in control over me.
I’m going to control you now. I’m the one calling the shots. I’m
not, you know—”
Th: What else? How do you beat her?
Pt: Make her bend over, strap her rear end hard. Just really let her have
it good and hard and go for it—Ahhhh, there’s just sexual tension
release, really real damned release here. Ugh! Really release.
Reeeeally release. It’s like, you know, “you’ve been a bad girl, and
you really deserve this, ugh! Arrrgh!” Whew.
Th: So, beating her and beating her, and then there’s a huge sexual
release.
Pt: Yeah, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes! Whew! Thank you. This has been
really wild, but I had to talk about it. [The tension and impulse go
out of his body as he relaxes back into the chair. The rageful
impulse has finally passed. Now I will inquire about other feelings
to see if he can access the previously unconscious mixed feelings
toward his mother.]
Th: Sure.
Pt: Had to talk about it.
Th: And so as we look at her body now on the floor, her legs are torn
off. Her breasts are torn off. Her arms are torn off. Her head is torn
off. What does her face look like, after all this? [I invite the patient
to look at her face to mobilize unconscious guilt feelings related to
his murderous rage.]
Pt: Shock. Like, “how could you do this? How could you do this? How
could you do this?”
Th: And what’s the feeling inside you, as you look at her eyes?
Pt: “Why did you do this to me?” I’m going someplace here and stay
with me.
Th: Um-hmmm.
De-repression of the Oedipal Conflict
In the following material, the patient reveals important parts of his
history. The patient’s father suffered a severe, incapacitating illness during
the patient’s childhood. In response, his mother put him in the father’s role,
asking him to take on responsibilities no child could bear.
Pt: I think something was going down here and why the frustration.
With my father not there, because of his illness, I think she was
expecting me to be the husband. She was expecting me to be the
husband. I wasn’t her husband. I was her son! “You are not my
wife. You are my mother! I’m your son, not your husband! You
take your problems to your husband! You trust your husband. So he
didn’t go when the doctor told him you were dying the first time.
So, he didn’t tell you, and you didn’t find out until later. You just
don’t cut him off and say, you know, I don’t go to you anymore.
Now Jim (the patient’s pseudonym) becomes the substitute
husband. Jim gets to deal with me. Jim gets to deal with all my
issues. I have to end up talking to Jim. No, I’m the child here! I’m
not the adult! I’m not the husband! It’s not my responsibility to
have to deal with you!” [This de-repression of memories, his
sudden awareness and analysis of his Oedipal conflict, and related
feelings constitute the beginning of the “unlocking of the
unconscious.”]
Th: Just let it out. There’s a lot of painful feeling here. Just let it out.
Pt: Yes. Yes, yes, yes! I’m still—My childhood is not there. It
disappeared. It was—God! [Begins to cry.]
Breakthrough of Grief
The remainder of the session is a series of breakthroughs of grief over
numerous losses (father, mother, sister, and his own childhood).
Th: Just let it out.
Pt: I never—gone—I was supposed to have a childhood.
Th: Just let it out. There’s a lot of grief, just let it out.
Pt: I was just an adult from too damn young! I had to be there! I had to
watch my father have that seizure when I was eight years old. I had
to be the one who had to stand up. “You were there, but I had to be
the damn adult! I had to start taking over! I had to do so damn
much! So damn much! Nobody here to do anything for me.”
Th: For you. Just let it out. You were all alone. Just let the grief out.
There’s tremendous pain.
Pt: Nobody there to do anything for me, damn it. I just have to take care
of myself. Always have to take care of myself.
Th: By yourself.
Pt: By myself! Always by myself, damn it!
Th: Just let it out.
Pt: Always by myself!
Th: Just let it out. You don’t have to talk over the pain.
Pt: Always by myself! No damn help! You go and try and get help and
you get told, “Well, you know, take some drugs, go away.” No
damn help! [He spontaneously links his frustration with the female
doctor and murderous rage toward his mother: two women who
were of no help.]
Th: Just like your mom.
Pt: Yep, no help! No help. Can’t get any help here, you know. Got to go
elsewhere.
In the midst of deep grief he reveals that after the death of his parents at
age nineteen, no family members offered any help. Indeed, several ran off
with family assets! He recounts how his doctor underestimated his
toughness.
Given what he describes, he clearly has a great deal of unresolved grief
over his mother’s death. So I return him to the scene of his mother’s dead
body and how he pictures burying her. He says he never really had a chance
to say goodbye because the last time he saw his mother in the minutes
before she died, she was yelling at him. He pictures being able to finally tell
her of his love. His grief and guilt pour out as he recounts his regrets over
not being able to undo her suffering.
Vignette Six (minutes 81–105)
We return at minute 81 during another wave of grief.
Pt: I just wanted to help you so damn much. I didn’t want you to go
through what you went through! I didn’t want that to happen to
you! I didn’t want that to happen to you. I didn’t want my father to
be sick. I didn’t want you to have to go through so much damn
pain! But I couldn’t do anything to help! I couldn’t do a damn thing
to help! I couldn’t stop it. [He had been enraged with his mother.
One way he dealt with the rage was to turn it on himself by
identifying with his mother’s accusations: “You could have done
more.” By accusing himself this way, he could punish himself
unconsciously for his murderous rage. Now with the passage of the
rage and guilt, we learn of his mother’s accusations and his
identification with her punitive voice.]
Th: You couldn’t stop her pain.
Pt: I couldn’t stop her pain. I couldn’t help. I could not help!
Th: Just let it out. You couldn’t stop her pain.
Pt: I couldn’t stop her pain. I could not help. I could not help.
Th: What else would you say to her, as your final goodbye?
Pt: Only believe in me. Believe that I will succeed.
Th: Believe that I will succeed.
Pt: Believe that I will succeed.
Th: Please believe me.
Pt: Believe.
Th: Please believe in me.
Pt: Yes, yes, yes.
Th: Anything else you want to say to her as a final goodbye?
Pt: Don’t be afraid. Don’t be afraid. God is with you. Don’t be afraid.
Th: God is with you. What would you say to her that you would want
her to carry with her for eternity that she could never forget?
Pt: I am always with you.
During minutes 84–104 he continues to grieve as he shares the details of
her death and funeral and how his extended family abandoned him. He
pictures giving her the kind of funeral she would have wanted, not the drab
one she actually received. And he sobs as he imagines singing at her
funeral, something he was not allowed to do by his family. He then recounts
how, after his mother’s death, his younger sister never got a chance to live
up to her potential. He mourns the life she never had and the one he lost too.
SUMMARY
This transcript illustrates how systematic invitation of the feeling and
defense work clears the way for the patient’s unconscious feelings to rise.
During the portrayal, keep addressing defenses so an unlocking can occur.
Encourage the patient to feel his grief, guilt, and love as deeply as possible.
By facing his complex feelings as deeply as possible, he regains a complex
feeling for and understanding of his loved ones. And by experiencing his
complex feelings, he becomes reunited with his own humanity. For, as
Martin Buber said, “The world is not comprehensible, but it is embraceable:
through the embracing of one of its beings.”
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Davanloo, H. (1990). The technique of unlocking the unconscious, part I: In
Unlocking the unconscious (pp. 101–124). New York: Wiley.
Davanloo, H. (1990). The technique of unlocking the unconscious, Part II:
Partial unlocking of the unconscious. In Unlocking the unconscious (pp.
125–162). New York: Wiley.
A
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Consolidation
ll interventions help increase the patient’s capacity to experience a
breakthrough to unconscious feeling. Once the patient has
experienced a breakthrough of unconscious feeling and memories,
the therapist interprets the de-repressed material.
Summarize the session for the patient. Begin by outlining the initial
conflict, the feeling the patient had, the anxiety in the body that was
aroused, the defenses the patient used, and the symptoms they caused. Then
link the patient’s feelings in the beginning of the session to unconscious
feelings that arose during the breakthrough. Link the conscious feelings in
the present to unconscious feelings from the past so the patient sees those
connections. Then link the unconscious guilt to the self-punishment the
patient has suffered. Link physical symptoms in his body to the damage he
inflicted on the other person’s body during the breakthrough. Show how he
attacks himself in the ways he attacked the person in the portrayal. Then
point out his mixed feelings toward that person so the patient develops a
more complex, integrated view of the other person and himself. Then invite
the patient to the therapeutic task. If he wants, the two of you can face these
previously buried emotions so he can overcome his symptoms and
suffering. If he agrees, you will have co-created a conscious and
unconscious therapeutic alliance.
Include the following ingredients in a consolidation at the end of the
session:
1. Outline the initial conflict.
2. Point out the anxiety the patient experienced and the feelings that
triggered it.
3. Point out the defenses the patient used in session and the symptoms
they cause.
4. Point out the mixed feelings that arose and then link those feelings
to unconscious feelings toward figures in the patient’s past.
5. Point out the guilt and how it has driven the patient’s selfpunishment.
6. Help the patient bear her mixed feelings to reach a more complex
experience of herself and others.
7. Then point out the therapeutic task and the reasons for undertaking
it: to overcome the patient’s problems and presenting symptoms to
achieve her goals in life.
The consolidation helps the patient understand the relationships between
her inner life and her outer problems. Help the patient see how the buried
feelings triggered her anxiety and defenses, creating her symptoms. These
insights lead to a better treatment outcome.
What follows is the phase of consolidation at the end of the first session
of the patient we looked at in chapters 1 and 14.
Th: You were obviously feeling enraged with the misdiagnosis, failure
to diagnose, failure to be really aggressive on the parts of the
doctors—
Pt: Right.
Th: And obviously you’re feeling very enraged, which is not your
problem, interestingly.
Pt: Right.
Th: Your problem is not that you were enraged. Your problem was that,
when you felt this enraged, it aroused tremendous anxiety.
Pt: Yes.
Th: And now we see that the situation with the doctors was echoing the
situation with your mother, with your sisters, with family members
that again it was a situation of someone who was not there for you.
[Link past and present.]
Pt: Right.
Th: You know, someone who has abandoned you, who’s supposed to be
responsible, caring for you, abandoning you, not taking care of you,
being neglectful—like your mother.
Pt: Yep.
Th: And what we saw was this tremendous, murderous rage really
wanting to tear this doctor apart, which aroused tremendous
anxiety. But we also saw that this rage you felt actually had to do
with your mother and that you loved your mother greatly, but that
there’s this tremendous rage over her demand, her control, her
denying your feelings, not wanting to know your feelings, wanting
to control and suppress and hold down any of your feelings, any of
your initiative— [Link his rage toward the doctor to the
unconscious rage toward his mother.]
Pt: Yeah.
Th: To be doing what she wanted.
Pt: Right.
Th: But we see that underneath that, you felt this tremendous rage,
murderous rage, wanting to tear her to pieces.
Pt: Sure.
Th: And it sounds like you felt such guilt about this because it’s clear
from the scene of the funeral that you loved your mother dearly.
[Link his rage toward his mother to his guilt and love, the
experience of complex mixed emotions.]
Pt: Yeah.
Th: You had a powerful love for your mother—
Pt: Absolutely.
Th: And that you felt such tremendous guilt about wanting to tear your
mother to pieces, that you were tempted to tear yourself to pieces.
[Link the unconscious rage toward his mother to his guilt, which
led him to turn the rage upon himself and identify with her.]
Pt: Sure.
Th: With very harsh self-criticism, and with very harsh self-judgment.
Pt: Yes.
Th: And then we’re understanding too, that in this murderous rage really
wanting to tear her to pieces the way you would verbally tear
yourself to pieces for years. [Link the unconscious rage to his
unconscious self-punishment.]
Pt: Yeah.
Th: That there was in this rage, there was also this wish to sexually
assault her, which helps us understand some of your difficulties
over the years about sexuality and the difficulty of being able to
ejaculate. [Link his sexual/rage impulse to his sexual symptom.]
Pt: Yep, yep, yep.
Th: We see that that got tangled up in there too.
Pt: Sure did.
Th: And we see also that, with all this rage toward your mother and the
guilt and the self-punishment, and the getting tangled up with love
and so on with women, that we see also another element. You’d
always actually really loved your mother.
Pt: Yes.
Th: And you had this terrible situation with your mother that even in the
death scene you’re imagining wanting to tell her that you loved her
and wanting her to believe that you loved her.
Pt: Yes.
Th: That her inability to believe in your love has been a source of
tremendous pain.
Pt: I think so.
Th: And you were left with the sense that any emotion, whether it was
your rage, whether it was your grief, whether it was your success,
whether it was your joy, all of these, you got the impression, would
hurt your mother. She said don’t bring me a feeling; quit doing that.
And we see how this has influenced your relationship with your
current wife. [Link his defenses against closeness with his mother to
the relationship with his wife.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: I’m not convinced that her diagnosis really requires you to hold
back emotions so much. I think this is the template you brought to
that relationship. [Point out how the transference of his mother onto
his wife does not fit the reality of his wife.]
Pt: Yeah.
Th: You were brought up with a sense that your emotions have to be
held back from a woman, because you learned with your mother
that that was the way you were supposed to love her; that if you
really loved your mother, you would hide your emotions. [Point out
the origin of the defenses.]
Pt: Yeah.
Th: Whereas, in fact, in most relationships, we achieve closeness by
sharing emotions.
Pt: Yes.
Th: Sharing emotions is how we get close. And yet you got the
impression that sharing emotions would hurt someone, rather than
give them an opportunity to feel closer and know you more
intimately.
Pt: Yeah.
Th: And we see that even here today part of what we were struggling
with is sharing these emotions with me. Because that template was
there: How close am I wanting to really be with Jon? And do I
really have permission to actually reveal all these emotions and
have the relief and comfort of having someone truly be with me,
wanting to know my emotions. [Link defenses against closeness
with his mother, his wife, and the therapist.]
Pt: Sure.
Th: Because remember also, when you were killing your mother, there
was a sense of, you don’t want to know what my feelings are.
Pt: Right.
Th: And you’ve always had the sense that no one really does want to
know my emotions. It’s okay for me to know other people’s
emotions, and so on and so forth, but it’s not okay for me to know
mine. [Link his mother’s rejection of his feelings to his rejection of
his feelings.]
Pt: Right.
Th: It suggests that one thing to really look at is to explore in a sense,
with your wife, how much of your emotions she would like to
know. It will allow her a certain kind of closeness.
Pt: Yeah.
Th: It’s probably scary for her not knowing what you feel and wanting a
closeness of knowing what you feel.
Pt: Yes, yes.
Th: This all comes together in a very powerful way. Although we don’t
know what’s causing the sleep difficulties and the sudden energy
losses that are happening at work, we’re certainly seeing how the
suppression of emotion through the pseudorelaxation and through
the tension, holding that down, has been very exhausting. [Link
defenses to his symptoms.]
Pt: I should note that the energy loss was not starting at work. It
happened outside of work. It’s been random.
Th: But we can also see how suppression of the emotion and the tensing
up that you’ve been doing would be very exhausting. [Point out the
effect of his defenses.]
Pt: No question. No question!
Th: And we’re also able to see that you’re able to feel and experience a
lot more emotion than you ever gave yourself credit for before.
Pt: Right.
Th: And by experiencing those emotions as deeply as you did, you’re
feeling much less tense. [Link his drop in anxiety to having faced
his feelings.]
Pt: Yeah, no question. No question.
Th: Have any other connections been occurring to you as a result of
what we just said?
Pt: [Sighs.] You’re right, that I’ve got to talk to [his wife] more and, you
know, I know that she’s going through some health problems of her
own. I know that one of the reasons I’ve held back is that we’ve
been investigating some thyroid issues and I felt guilty during this
—part—I knew things were wrong. I shoved off my stuff, saying,
“Let me get you fixed first and as soon as you’re fixed, then”—
Well, it didn’t quite work out that way, but you know that certainly
ticked on—
Th: That helps us understand that you were abandoned as a child in so
many ways, and yet, with [your wife] by not revealing your
emotions, you leave yourself in an abandoned position because you
don’t give yourself a chance to see how much of your emotion [she]
could stay with, and how much emotional closeness the two of you
could have to let your relation develop into a much more
emotionally intimate way. You don’t have to repeat the past of
simply being a caretaker with [her], but you could actually have
emotional closeness with her. That wasn’t possible back then. [Link
the defense of emotional distancing with the price: he leaves
himself in an abandoned position, lonely and isolated.]
Pt: Right, I’ve got to get out of the caretaker thing. I mean, she’s doing
the best that she can. She does drive some. She does do things. It’s
not like she’s not housebound, but there’s probably some
resentment on my part that I am picking up some stuff, but I’m
probably overblowing it at this point in time.
Th: It’s probably quite strong, and that’s something we could come back
to, because it would make sense that there are probably mixed
feelings, and the more we face them here, the more we can help
your tension level go down. [Point out the therapeutic task.]
After the patient describes his work situation briefly, the therapist
continues:
Th: It sounds like the more we help you deal with all the stuff that’s
been backed up underneath, that when you’re dealing with these
tensions, you won’t be feeling such a pressure from underneath.
Pt: We’re going after the big stuff, which is what we’ve got to do.
OUTCOME AND COURSE OF TREATMENT
Following this session, the patient’s somatic complaints ended. His
sleep disorder of thirteen years ended. His sleep returned to normal, his
shaking stopped, his physical collapses stopped, his headaches lessened
dramatically, and there were no further reports of bowel complaints. His
wife had to drive him to this first session. He drove by himself to the next
session two days later—the first time he had driven for a long distance in
months. And he did this after having returned to work that morning. He
never lost another day of work to physical collapse. His headaches ended
completely after session seven.
The treatment continued for ten sessions. Many breakthroughs of
murderous rage, guilt, and grief toward the mother occurred. However, the
major work later in treatment involved transforming pathological mourning
over multiple losses into normal grief, and, through the grieving,
overcoming his resistances to emotional closeness.
At the beginning of treatment, he was so crippled by his collapses that
he was working from home in bed. At the end of treatment, he was
promoted to the highest professional position he ever had. His doctor
exclaimed, “This is the best you’ve ever looked in years.” His blood
pressure had dropped thirty-one points. He stopped all medications and his
neurological treatment. His headaches stopped after the seventh session. He
reported that he had formerly thought of himself as “introverted,” but now
he says, “that’s out the window.” Cognitively, he said, “It’s like the lights
are back on.” His relationships with his wife and family were closer. He
described himself as more open and friendly than ever before. “I’ve got my
life back. More than back. I’ve got something different.” “I’m a happy man.
I never had this level of happiness. This is a new peak level. Not there in
fifty-two years. I’m going to have a lot more happiness and pleasure in my
life. I got the tools. Life is going to be different from this point forward.”
SUMMARY
Rather than speculate about what is underneath the defenses, help the
patient turn against them. Eventually, repressed feelings rise to the surface.
Then trust the patient’s unconscious to bring forth the relevant feelings and
memories to the surface. Whereas some therapists interpret to bring
material to the surface, here we interpret only after unconscious material
has risen. We do not speculate about what is underneath. We interpret and
put together only what has been de-repressed. By doing so, we help the
patient develop an integrated understanding of his inner life that links his
unconscious feelings with his conscious suffering, his past with his present,
and his inner life with its outer expressions.
I
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Conclusion
n intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy we help the patient see
the triangle of conflict (feelings, anxiety, and defenses), which creates
her presenting problems and symptoms. Once we have consensus on
the problem for which she wants our help and consensus on what causes her
problem, we can get consensus on the therapeutic task.
The patient’s task is to see and let go of defenses that have hurt her, to
face rather than avoid what makes her anxious, and to experience her
warded-off feelings as deeply as possible. This therapeutic task requires
emotional courage on the part of the patient. Likewise, the therapist must
point out rather than avoid the patient’s defenses. The therapist must also
help the patient face what she fears. And the therapist must help the patient
face her feelings as deeply as possible rather than avoid them. This takes
emotional courage on the part of the therapist.
Persisting in the face of the patient’s defenses is a form of love.
Willingness to face the patient’s rage when you address her defenses is also
a form of love and a way of being present to the patient. Developing this
courage as a therapist and a patient is a lifelong task in the service of our
own growth and development.
In therapy, choosing to go against conditioning (defenses) is our
continual act of self-transcendence and self-creation (Berdyaev 1944). No
matter how conditioned we are by our past and genetics, we always have a
choice we can make in response to conditions, even if, at worst, our only
choice available is the attitude we take (Frankl 1959). Each choice, moment
by moment, creates the meaning of our lives. And, fortunately, at each
moment we have the chance to make a different choice, rather than remain
imprisoned by our habitual defenses. At each moment in therapy, the patient
faces a question: What will I choose? Will I accept or reject my inner life?
The therapist, too, faces a choice: Will I help the patient let go of his
defenses or collaborate with them? Will I reach out or pull back?
We began this book with the question of why we suffer. Then we
showed various ways to end suffering. And now we conclude by talking
about the person we find under the defenses. Defenses are impersonal
habits. Our task is always to reach out to the person hidden underneath the
conditioning.
Sadly, the patient often cannot differentiate himself as a living reality
from the ideas he has about himself. He understands himself as a static
object, not as a dynamic person. Yet he is always something greater and
other than his concepts, which can only point to the living reality of him as
a person. The patient is not his defenses, his habits, or his resistances. These
impersonal automaticities only point to his slavery and determinism, not to
his innate capacity for love and freedom.
Likewise, therapists can also forget to differentiate the living person of
the patient from the defenses he has. We propose impersonal entities like
“ego” and “superego” and forget this crucial question: “Who is the person
who observes and criticizes himself ?” When we forget, the patient becomes
an impersonal object directed by impersonal forces. We lose sight of the
patient as a person, an existential center who creates himself. The person is
not merely some contents but a creative act, a triumph over the determinism
of defenses and genetics.
This determination of himself from within, arising out of freedom, is
personality (Berdyaev 1944, 26–27). Everything done to him in the past is
impersonal. That is why the present moment is so important. The creative
act in this moment reveals who the patient is becoming.
This is why, when asked to define a person, Martin Buber answered, “A
mystery.” We are always coming to know a person, whose potentials and
future choices will reveal ever-new dimensions of his being. A person is
always unknowable (Frank 1983), not only because living reality always
surpasses our static concepts, but also because we cannot know what
potentials may yet be realized in the coming to be of this person. That is
why, as Bakhtin (1981) said, “The final word has not been written” about
any person. Any comment the patient makes about herself can only point to
the larger reality of who she is and could become. Likewise, any
interpretation the therapist makes cannot define the patient, but merely
point to the potential person who has been hidden under her defenses.
As Frieda Fromm-Reichmann said, “The patient does not need an
interpretation, but a new experience,” (Hornstein 2000), but an experience
of what? Bion (1970) proposed that we become transformed by becoming at
one with the emotional Truth of this moment. With the collapse of the
impersonal defenses, the person emerges in the form of feeling. Through
feeling, the patient comes face to face with the mystery of her being,
something larger than any thoughts or ideas she had before. This direct
experience of her being transforms who she thought she was, but, more
important, it transforms who she is becoming.
That is why we do this work.
Referenc