Dynamic Psychotherapy
walked into the well-appointed office, glancing at the paintings on the
wall. The analyst shook my hand. I sat down, and he began our
interview. He said he and his colleagues were delighted by my
application to the institute to become a psychoanalyst, but they had only
one concern: “We’re not sure you are analyzable, given the amount of
trauma in your history.”
I was shocked. I was being judged on what had been done to me in the
past, not what I had done with it. What had been done to me was
impersonal. I had just been the accidental location where bad things had
happened. The analysts were paying attention to the impersonal, not to me,
the person.
During later interviews, most of the analysts asked about the traumas in
my background, but no one asked, “How did you get to where you are
today?” “How did you overcome these difficulties and get this far?” In
short, no one asked a question about what I did, only about what others had
done to me.
When they judged me based on what had been done to me, for the first
time I began to feel proud of what I had done in spite of that past. Like
everyone else, I had to make choices throughout my life to overcome those
past obstacles. Now I had a new appreciation for the acts of will (Rank
1936) by which we create ourselves (Berdyaev 1944) and give meaning to
our lives (Frankl 1959).
In the end, this experience was a gift. It highlighted the basic tension in
the psychotherapy field between freedom and determinism. Patients come
to us because they have lost their freedom to engage in self-creation. They
have become determined, in part, by defenses of which they are unaware.
They know they want something different in their lives but are unable to see
what inhibits their freedom. Our task as therapists is to help them recover
their freedom to love, to live, and to create a life that matters. Their past,
their diagnoses, and their genetics are easy to mistake as factors that
completely determine their lives. But then we relate to dead concepts rather
than living persons. Our overarching task is to recognize those determining
forces while mobilizing patients’ self-creative capacity to act.
The acts by which we create our lives and meaning will be the focus of
this book. What we do can create a beautiful life full of meaning or a
desperate life full of suffering. At each moment in therapy we have a
choice: to face our inner life or run from ourselves, to engage in the
therapeutic task or avoid it. When we run from our inner life, we create
suffering. Usually, we do not consciously pursue suffering, but we may
automatically engage in actions that create it. Our task as therapists is to
help patients see how they hurt themselves so they can stop suffering. To do
that, we must understand what causes suffering.
From the Buddha thousands of years ago to neuroscientists today,
people have tried to answer that question. Cognitive therapists say we suffer
because of maladaptive cognitions. Emotion-focused therapists say we
suffer because of avoided feelings. Psychoanalysts say we suffer because of
unresolved conflicts and transference reactions in relationships. Body
workers say we suffer because of adaptive action tendencies, which have
become frozen in the body. Behavior therapists say we suffer because of all
these maladaptive behaviors. Mindfulness therapists say we suffer because
we are unable to pay attention to our experience at each moment. And the
Buddha? He said we suffer because we resist reality.
We have all these answers and therapies, each of which has helped
patients. Now that its first hundred years have passed, the field of
psychotherapy is undergoing a scientific revolution (Kuhn 1970). Clinicians
widely recognize the need for an integrative model of treatment. This book
will present an integrative theory and a model of intervention based on
moment-to-moment assessment of a patient’s needs.
THE NATURE OF SUFFERING
To begin, we must first address the fundamental question: why do we
suffer? Only by understanding suffering can we develop a coherent model
for treating it. And to understand suffering, we must understand the
difference between pain and suffering. In life, pain is inevitable. Everyone
we love will die, and everything we have we will lose, either before or at
the moment of death. We can respond to the inevitable pain of life in two
ways. The person whose heart has been broken and gives up loving ends up
with an empty heart. The person with a broken heart who continues to love
has a full heart, knowing that everyone we love we lose through death or
abandonment. That is why there are only two kinds of hearts: empty hearts
and loving hearts. It takes courage to face the inevitable losses and yet, in
spite of it all, to keep on loving and being open to life.
The reality of loss and disappointment is built into every relationship.
Each of us wants something from every person in our life. Yet our loved
ones can do only one of three things. They can deliver, delay, or disappoint.
They cannot always want what we want. And even if they want to give us
what we want, they may not have the ability. The conflict between desire
and reality is inherent in human existence. So we avoid the pain of life by
using defenses, which bring us suffering. Rather than face reality, we avoid
it, no longer able to deal with it effectively. That is why the Buddha said
that our relationship to desire is the source of suffering: desiring what we
cannot have, what does not exist in reality, makes us suffer. When our
desires bump into reality, we realize people do not want what we want, they
cannot always give us what we want, and our fantasy is different from
reality.
In response, we experience feelings and anxiety. We can face all the
feelings and anxiety evoked by reality so we can deal with it adaptively. Or
we can avoid facing reality and our feelings. However, avoidance creates
our suffering. The pain of loss, illness, and death is inevitable, but suffering
from our defenses is optional—if we learn to see and turn against them.
What do we mean by defenses? They are the ways we resist reality and
our feelings in response to it. We avoid feelings through maladaptive
thoughts (cognitive therapy), behaviors (behavior therapy), relational
patterns (psychoanalysis, cognitive and behavior therapy), or inattention
(mindfulness therapy).
When we use a defense to avoid reality, we cannot deal with reality
effectively. If we avoid our feelings through self-critical thoughts, we
become depressed. When we use defenses to avoid reality and feelings, we
become out of touch with life and ourselves. If we avoid feelings through
avoidant behaviors, our relationships fail. The man who projects onto other
people suffers from tormenting relationships and a life of loneliness. The
housewife who excuses her husband for hitting her traps herself in an
abusive marriage. It turns out the Buddha was right. Defenses, our
resistance to what is, create our symptoms and presenting problems.
CAUSALITY
We have seen that pain in life is inevitable, but suffering from defenses
is optional. So let us examine the causality of suffering. First, a stimulus in
reality triggers our feelings (Damasio 1999). Those feelings make us
anxious (Damasio 1999; S. Freud 1923a, 1961, 1926; LeDoux 1998). We
can face our feelings and anxiety to deal with reality effectively (Hartmann
1964). Or we can avoid our feelings and anxiety through defenses, which
create our symptoms and presenting problems (S. Freud 1923a, 1961). For
instance, a man verbally abuses his fiancée (stimulus). In response, she feels
angry. However, she grew up with people who condemned her expressions
of anger. So instead of feeling angry at her fiancé, she becomes anxious.
Rather than use her anger to set a limit to his verbal abuse, she wards her
anger off with defenses. She rationalizes, “He was angry because he didn’t
receive a raise from his boss.” She minimizes what he did and what she felt
by saying, “It was no big deal.” She turns the anger onto herself by saying,
“I deserved what he said because I did something stupid.” These defenses
create her symptoms: by turning the anger on herself, she becomes
depressed, and by rationalizing away her feelings and minimizing what her
fiancé did, she keeps herself stuck with a series of abusive men. After all,
she tells herself that her fiancé’s verbal abuse is “no big deal.”
How do we help her? First, we must find out what she suffers from. We
do so by asking her what problem she wants us to help her with. Then we
ask about her difficulties, their origin, and their history.
Her answers tell us a great deal. Perhaps she answers our questions
readily. Maybe she floods with anxiety as soon as she shares her inner life
with us. She could even claim to have no problem at all! Every answer is
good. It tells us what she needs help with and her ability to co-create a
relationship for change. Once we have surveyed the patient’s problem and
she declares her will to explore it, we explore a specific example of her
problem to get a clear picture of what causes it.
As we explore, a surprising pattern occurs in therapy. The patient comes
to your office seeking help. Yet as soon as you ask about her problem, her
will to explore it, or a specific example, the patient often becomes anxious
(S. Freud 1926/1961 A. Freud 1936) and uses defenses (S. Freud
1923a/1961). Why?
Sadly, most patients who seek therapy have been hurt in previous
relationships. They have learned that closeness and sharing lead to pain
(Bowlby 1973, 1980). Patients want help, but their anxiety signals that this
relationship, like earlier ones, could be painful. So patients use defenses to
avoid sharing their feelings, hopes, and desires. We call this pattern of
feeling-anxiety-defense the triangle of conflict (Malan 1979). (See chapter 5
for an elaboration on the triangle of conflict.)
Every conflict creating the patient’s symptoms has this form: (1) the
patient has a feeling, (2) he automatically becomes anxious physically in his
body, (3) a moment later he uses a defense to ward off that feeling, and (4)
that defense creates his symptoms and presenting problems. Every
statement you make invites the patient to co-create a relationship for
change. By sharing a feeling, the patient dares to co-create a relationship for
change based on emotional closeness. By becoming anxious or sharing a
defense, the patient unwittingly creates a past relationship. His anxiety and
defenses are not a problem for the therapist. They are the history of the
patient’s suffering, what he implicitly is asking you to heal.
If he expresses a feeling, we encourage him to feel that feeling more
deeply to get to the bottom of his difficulties. If he is too anxious, we
regulate his anxiety and then explore his feeling. If he uses a defense, we
help him see the defense and its cost so he can let go of it and face his
feeling. These are the three basic principles of all psychotherapy
interventions. Although the principles are simple, their application can be
complex, as the rest of the book will illustrate.
When patients respond with anxiety or defense, we do not follow these
detours. Instead, we identify each detour and invite the patient to focus on
his feeling. Maintaining a consistent focus on feelings is one of the most
important skills for therapists to learn. Feelings express our primary
motivations and drives (Tomkins 1962). Without them, we lack a compass
to show us where we want to go in life (P. Coughlin, personal
communication).
Here is an analogy. Suppose I was teaching you to drive and you drive
into a ditch. I’ll say, “Could you turn the wheel so we can get back on the
road toward your destination?” You might tell me, “I want to drive in the
ditch!” I’ll reply, “That is certainly your right, but as long as you drive in
the ditch, you won’t reach your destination.” If you tell me that driving in
the ditch is just the way you are, I’ll say, “It’s not the way you are, but it is
the way you drive your car. You say you want us to drive north toward New
York, but you have a habit of driving the car into the ditch, onto the beach,
and into the ocean. If you drive that way, we’ll get stuck, and you won’t end
up in New York.” If the patient goes on a detour to anxiety, regulate his
anxiety and then return to the focus on his feeling. If the patient goes on a
detour to defense, help him see the defense, let go of it, and return to
focusing on his feeling. If he continues to detour to anxiety and defense, he
will not achieve his goals in therapy.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SUFFERING AND THE
THERAPEUTIC TASK
As mindfulness practices have shown, we do not avoid reality or our
feelings once in a while (Safran 2003). We create our suffering and
symptoms moment by moment all day long. Thus, moment by moment we
must help the patient see the defenses that create his suffering. One might
think of therapy as a form of guided mindfulness meditation. We help the
patient pay attention to reality in this moment, his internal experience. Each
time he ignores his inner life by using a defense, we help him see his
defense and return to his feeling. As he lets go of his defenses, they no
longer cause his suffering, and he becomes in touch with himself. Each time
he pays attention to reality in this moment, he becomes more present (Eigen
1998). And he becomes at one with the emotional truth of this moment
(Bion 1970).
To do this, the patient must relinquish his defenses and face the feelings
he fears and has avoided. Through these two choices, the patient joins the
therapist to co-create a relationship for change: the therapeutic alliance.
With this understanding of causality, the therapeutic task becomes clear:
help the patient see and relinquish the defenses that cause his suffering. By
feeling his feelings as deeply as possible, he will be able to channel them
into adaptive action, and he will gain insight into the reasons he used those
defenses in the first place.
In every therapy session we see the following sequence: (1) the therapist
invites the patient to form a closer relationship, (2) the patient has a feeling,
(3) he becomes anxious, (4) he uses a defense, and (5) he experiences a
symptom or presenting problem. This sequence happens every time you
invite a closer relationship, anywhere up to 150 times an hour! From this
perspective, we do not say a patient “has” depression. Instead, defenses
create and sustain his depression all day.
This gives us hope. If we can stop every defense that hurts the patient
and help him see and relinquish them, his symptoms will diminish and
disappear. From this point of view, defense interruption is an act of
compassion toward the patient (S. Warshow, personal communication).
Collaboration with the patient’s defenses hurts the patient. Let me give an
example.
One day a patient had not shown up for her session. I wondered if she
might be in the hallway. I went out there and sure enough, there she was,
sitting on the floor, cutting her wrist with an X-Acto knife while watching
the blood drip onto a pile of napkins on the floor. I did not just watch her
defense, cutting her wrist. I took the knife away from her and brought her
into my office. Every defense is a cut to the soul. If these defenses are not
blocked, the patient may die the death of a thousand cuts. In this model of
therapy, we take a firm stand with the patient against defenses that cause her
suffering.
By helping the patient relinquish her defenses, we help her embrace
herself and her inner life. In short, we help her have compassion for herself
by demonstrating our compassion for her. In a letter to Carl Jung, Sigmund
Freud once wrote, “Psychoanalysis is a cure through love” (S. Freud and
Jung, 1994). And that love is itself an act of faith. As one patient said to me,
“You saw who I was underneath all the chaos and defenses before I knew
there was a me there to be found.” Through our constant attention to the
patient’s inner life and our blockage of the defenses that strangle it, we
embrace the patient’s inner life and encourage her to do the same.
In this book you will learn many techniques to help patients. Technique
often refers to the way we manipulate an object, for example, sculpting a
piece of wood. In contrast, psychotherapy techniques are ways of relating to
the patient, of demonstrating our love and compassion. Techniques are not
merely ways of “doing” but ways of “being together.” Our constant
attention to the patient’s feelings demonstrates our belief that she has the
right to become free from the defenses that have perpetuated her suffering.
Then she can take up the path of self-creation that is personality itself
(Berdyaev 1944).
To begin this journey of psychotherapy, we must explore the patient’s
presenting problems to develop a consensus on the problem, its causes, and
the therapeutic task, which will resolve the problem. But to do this, the
therapist needs to understand how to explore feeling, regulate anxiety,
identify defenses, and assess the patient. Only with those tools will the
therapist be able to develop a conscious therapeutic alliance effectively. So
let us begin by learning how to explore feelings.
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Abbass, A., Town, J., and Driessen, E. (2012). Intensive short-term
dynamic psychotherapy: A systematic review and meta-analysis of
outcome research. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 20(2), 97–108.
http://www.istdpinstitute.com/resources/.
Coughlin Della Selva, P. (1996). The integration of theory and technique in
Davanloo’s intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy. In Intensive
short-term dynamic psychotherapy: Theory and Technique (pp. 1–25).
New York: Wiley.
Malan, D., and Coughlin Della Selva, P. (2006). Empirical support for
Davanloo’s ISTDP. In Lives transformed: A revolutionary method of
dynamic psychotherapy (pp. 34–74). London: Karnac.
Neborsky, R. (2001). Davanloo’s method of intensive short-term dynamic
psychotherapy. In M. Solomon, R. Neborsky, L. McCullough, M.
Alpert, F. Shapiro, and D. Malan (Eds.), Short-term therapy for longterm change (pp. 16–53). New York: W. W. Norton.
RECOMMENDED MATERIALS
For information on forming a therapeutic alliance presented in videos by
Jon Frederickson, visit the URLs below.
Intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy part 1 (October 5, 2011).
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cKzmk2-xnzY
Intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy part 2 (October 5, 2011).
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dK2x906ptWA.
Intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy part 3 (January 18, 2012),
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sDmVgoKPVkw.
PART ONE
Establishing an Effective Focus
L
CHAPTER ONE
Feelings: Where We Focus in Therapy
izards, lions, and humans are all moved by the bodily activations
known as emotions (Darwin 1872/1998; Panksepp 1998). These
emotions organize animal behavior. Unlike reptiles and mammals,
however, we can become conscious of those physical activations in the
body and label them as feelings. Subjectively, becoming aware of our
feelings gives us a sense of a core self (Damasio 1994, 1999), the basis for
our identity. Intersubjectively, feelings allow us to know others and be
intimate (Kelly 1996; Nathanson 1996). And culturally, feelings allow us to
have shared values, which we express through laws, religions, and art.
Feelings allow for the intergenerational transmission of culture by which we
connect to the accumulated consciousness of humankind (Trevarthen 2009,
57).
Feelings are the fundamental way we make sense of the world. They tell
us what we want and what we do not, what gives us pleasure and what gives
us pain. They mobilize us to act adaptively on our own behalf, to pursue our
goals in life (Tomkins 1962). Like a GPS unit, feelings tell us where we are,
where we want to go, and how to get there.
HOW TO FOCUS ON FEELINGS
When we do not know what we feel, we go through life without an
emotional compass (P. Coughlin, personal communication). Evolution
provided us with feelings, which organize the body, so we can act
adaptively. Patients who use defenses to ignore their feelings lose the
information feelings provide. Feelings and desire no longer mobilize their
actions; anxiety and defenses do (Schore 2009). Therapy helps patients let
go of their defenses so they can face their feelings. By learning to “feel and
deal” (Fosha 2000), they can channel their feelings into adaptive actions
rather than maladaptive defenses. Thus, we intervene to help patients
experience previously avoided feelings.
Seemingly everyone knows what feelings are. Suppose you ask a
patient, “What is the feeling toward your boyfriend for slapping you in the
face?” She might offer one of the following comments as descriptions of
her feeling:
“I feel he shouldn’t have done that.”
“I feel he did that because of his upbringing.”
“I feel betrayed.”
“I feel detached.”
“I feel like leaving him.”
“I feel tense.”
“I feel sad.”
“I feel angry.”
Only the last statement is the feeling toward her boyfriend. Let’s
examine these responses in detail to understand what feelings are.
“I feel he shouldn’t have done that.” This is not a feeling but the way
the patient avoids a feeling: the defense of intellectualization. The
patient offers a thought rather than her feeling. She does not
distinguish between her thought and her feeling toward her
boyfriend. The therapist might respond, “Well, that’s your thought,
but your thought is not a feeling. If you don’t cover your feeling with
a thought, what is the feeling toward him for slapping you in the
face?”
“I feel he did that because of his upbringing.” This is not a feeling
but the defense of rationalization. The patient tries to explain the
reason her boyfriend hit her rather than describe the feeling toward
him for doing so. She does not differentiate her explanation from her
feeling. The therapist might respond, “Well, that’s the reason he
slapped you, but that doesn’t say what the feeling is toward him for
slapping you. If we don’t go off to reasons, what is the feeling
toward him for slapping you?”
“I feel betrayed.” This is not a feeling but the stimulus. He betrayed
her by slapping her (stimulus). Naturally, she has a feeling in
response. She does not recognize the difference between the stimulus
(the slap, the act of betrayal) and her feeling toward her boyfriend.
The therapist might differentiate the stimulus from the feeling by
responding, “Of course! He betrayed you. That’s what he did by
slapping you. So what is the feeling toward him for betraying you?”
“I feel detached.” This is not a feeling but how she avoids her feeling
using the defense of detaching. The patient does not see the
difference between her feeling and the way she wards it off. The
therapist might differentiate the defense from the feeling by
responding, “Detached is not your feeling. Detaching is how you
avoid your feeling. You detach. If you don’t detach, could we look at
the feeling toward him for slapping you?”
“I feel like leaving him.” This is not a feeling but the action
mobilized by her feeling. She does not differentiate her feeling from
the impulse, her intended action. The therapist might respond, “It
makes sense you want to leave him. What is the feeling toward him
that makes you want to leave?”
“I feel tense.” This is not a feeling but the anxiety triggered by her
feeling. She does not differentiate her feeling from her anxiety. The
therapist might differentiate the anxiety from the feeling by
responding, “That’s your anxiety, but anxiety is not the feeling
toward him. If we don’t cover the feeling with anxiety and tension,
what is the feeling toward him that makes you tense?”
“I feel sad.” Sadness is a feeling, but it is not the feeling toward the
boyfriend. She does not differentiate her reactive feeling toward him
from the sadness that covers it. The therapist might respond, “This
sadness is a feeling between you and you. If we don’t cover this
other feeling with sadness, can we take a look at the feeling toward
him for slapping you?” In this case, we would consider the sadness a
defensive affect because it functions as a defense to cover up her
anger.
“I feel angry.” This is the patient’s feeling toward someone who hit
her. She might feel sad that he hit her. She might be afraid to be
close to him again in the future, but anger would be the reactive
feeling toward someone who hit her. In clinical practice, patients
often describe their sadness or anxiety, not their reactive feeling of
anger.
In these examples, the patient could not differentiate her feeling from a
defense, the stimulus, anxiety, an impulse, or a defensive affect. We must
help patients make these differentiations so they can become conscious of
their feelings.
CONSCIOUSNESS OF FEELINGS
By becoming conscious of our feelings, we can perceive, reflect upon,
express, and channel them into healthy actions (Monsen et al. 1995, 1996).
To acquire this self-knowledge, we must pay attention to the emotions in
the body rather than use a defense to avoid them. We must tolerate the
experience of emotion in the body long enough to label and understand our
feelings. Patients who do not know what they feel do not know what they
want.
We used two words above: emotions and feelings. The brain
nonconsciously assesses the environment. This message goes to the limbic
system in the brain, mobilizing the bodily reactions known as emotions
(Damasio 1999). Humans can become conscious of bodily emotions and
label them as feelings.
Emotion researchers have found six basic feelings: anger, fear, disgust,
sadness, surprise, and happiness (Ekman 2003; Izard 1994; Tomkins 1962).
These feelings are unique because they are identified by specific facial
expressions recognized around the world (Ekman 1992, 2003; Keltner et al.
2003), specific autonomic nervous system (ANS) activation (Davidson
2004; Ekman and Davidson 1994; Levenson 2003), and specific adaptive
action tendencies (Frijda 1986), motoric routines activated by the feelings.
Other feelings, known as social emotions, involve more cognition and have
no specific biological markers. We will focus only on the six basic feelings
plus guilt and shame because they are the primary generators of conflict.
Based on what we have learned so far, we must help the patient: (1) pay
attention to her feelings, (2) label her feelings accurately, (3) experience her
feelings in the body, and (4) experience the action tendency of her feelings.
To do so, she must see and turn against anxiety and defenses, which prevent
her from becoming aware of her feelings.
INVITING FEELINGS: MAINTAINING THE FOCUS
We feel feelings all day long. Sometimes these feelings can trigger
anxiety based on previous experiences. If sharing feelings was dangerous in
a past relationship, the body reacts as if it is still dangerous. The patient
who learned to hide her feelings in the past may do so today. Hiding
feelings may have been adaptive then, but now it creates presenting
problems and symptoms. Thus, the therapeutic task is to help patients see
and let go of their defenses so they can face their feelings.
To do this, we ask the patient to tell us the problems for which he seeks
help. With his permission, we explore a specific example to find out the
feelings he has and the defenses he uses to avoid them. Suppose he
mentions a boss who humiliated him. To explore a specific situation, we
ask, “What is the feeling toward your boss for doing that?” Thus begins the
phase of inviting feeling.
We must constantly focus on feeling while addressing anxiety and
defenses as detours. This brings up a common misunderstanding about “free
association.” Freud initially thought that unconscious feelings would rise if
he invited a patient to say what comes to mind. But he discovered that,
rather than freely associate to difficult issues, patients often associate away
from them by using defenses (S. Freud 1923/1961c). That is why we must
systematically point out the patient’s defenses and block them.
The therapist must be active. Defenses do not occur only once or twice a
session. A highly resistant patient can use 150 defenses in a fifty-minute
session. With so many defenses, no access to feelings and no therapeutic
alliance will be possible. Defenses create an insecure attachment,
symptoms, and presenting problems. We must show compassion by
blocking every single defense that destroys the possibility of treatment.
Never interrupt the patient’s feelings, the outpouring of his inner life.
Always interrupt defenses that block his inner life.
As soon as the patient responds with anxiety or defense, help him see
the difference between (1) a feeling and a stimulus, and then invite the
feeling, (2) a feeling and anxiety, and then invite the feeling, or (3) a feeling
and a defense, and then invite the feeling. Always address the “detour,” and
then explore the feeling. Patients usually respond either with anxiety or
defense. To help the patient, point out his detour to anxiety or defense, then
invite him to face his feeling instead. By doing so, we co-create a better
relationship, both of us paying close attention to his inner life. In the
following vignette, a moderately resistant patient has just reported that his
fiancée in a fit of rage threw her engagement ring into the gutter.
Therapist (Th): What’s the feeling toward her for doing that? [Invite the
feeling.]
Patient (Pt): I think the reason she did it was that I didn’t want to go to
the restaurant she wanted. [Defense: rationalization.]
Th: That’s the reason, but the reason she did it is not the feeling you
have toward her. If we leave the reason off to the side, can we take
a look at the feeling toward her for throwing the ring in the gutter?
[Point out the defense, differentiate the defense from the feeling,
encourage the patient to turn against the defense, and then invite
the feeling.]
Pt: I feel disappointed. [Defense: confusing the stimulus with the
feeling.]
Th: Of course! She disappointed you. That’s what she did. What is the
feeling toward her for doing that? [Point out the stimulus,
differentiate the stimulus from the feeling, and then invite the
feeling.]
Pt: I feel uncomfortable about the whole situation, where to go, what to
do, you know? [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: Uncomfortable is vague. It doesn’t tell us what the feeling is toward
her for throwing the ring in the gutter. What is the feeling toward
her? [Point out the defense, differentiate the defense from the
feeling, and then invite the feeling.]
Pt: I suppose I could be irritated. [Defense: hypothetical speech.]
Th: You suppose? Either you are irritated or you’re not. Which is it in
your opinion? [Point out and block the defense, and then invite the
feeling.]
Pt: I don’t feel anger. [Defense: negation.]
Th: You say you don’t feel anger. That tells us what you don’t feel. But
still we don’t know what you do feel. What is the feeling toward
her for throwing the ring in the gutter? [Point out the negation, and
then invite the feeling.]
Pt: [Tears in his eyes.] I feel sad. [Defense: tears covering the anger
toward her.]
Th: Do you notice how these tears come in to cover your feeling toward
her? If we put the tears to the side, could we take a look at the
feeling toward her for throwing the engagement ring away? [Point
out the defense, encourage the patient to turn against the defense,
and then invite the feeling.]
Pt: I threw my glasses on the ground and they broke. [Defense:
displacement.]
Th: But the glasses didn’t do anything to you, did they?
Pt: No.
Th: If you don’t put the feeling out onto your glasses, what is the feeling
toward your fiancée? [Point out the defense of displacement and
invite the patient to turn against the defense and face his feeling
instead.]
Pt: I’m angry. [The patient can describe his feeling, so we go to the next
stage and ask, “How do you experience that anger physically in
your body?]
Each time, we address the patient’s defense or anxiety and then focus on
the feeling. Thus, inviting the feeling is not an indiscriminate intervention.
Inviting the feeling allows us to assess the patient’s responses so we know
what to treat.
Let’s review some common mistakes therapists make in this phase.
FAILURES TO INVITE FEELING
To keep a clear focus on the reactive feeling, ask, “What is the feeling
toward her for throwing the ring?”
Notice how and why the following questions fail to keep an effective
focus.
“What are your feelings about that?” The therapist didn’t focus on a
specific feeling. The patient could say “sad” or “anxious.” But the
therapist cannot show the patient how sadness covers the reactive
feeling of anger. The therapist becomes vague (“about that”) rather
than specific about the stimulus (“for throwing the ring in the
gutter”).
“What’s the feeling?” This question is not specific. The patient can
say “anger,” “sadness,” or “anxiety,” each of which would answer
the therapist’s question. Much better would be, “What’s the feeling
toward her for throwing the ring in the gutter?” Focus on the reactive
feeling.
“Do you have a feeling about that?” The patient could say no. Of
course, he has a feeling. Don’t ask if he has a feeling. Ask, “What is
the feeling toward her for throwing the ring in the gutter?”
“What are your thoughts about that?” This question invites the
patient to use the defense of intellectualization by sharing his
thoughts, not his feelings.
“Why did she do that?” The therapist invites the patient to speculate
about someone else. This question invites the patient to project onto
others rather than focus on his feelings.
“What is that like?” This vague question invites thinking, not feeling.
“How do you feel about that?” This question is vague. The patient
could respond with a feeling, anxiety, or a defense, but you would
not be able to help him face the feeling he avoids.
“What was the feeling then?” This question invites the patient to
detach from the present and think about the past. Focus on the
patient’s feeling in this moment. Remind him of the stimulus to
trigger the feeling now: “What is the feeling toward her for throwing
the ring in the gutter?”
INVITING FEELINGS
Do not be discouraged when the patient responds with anxiety and
defenses. Those responses tell us what to treat: excessive anxiety or
excessive defense. Each time, address the anxiety or defense, and then
invite the feeling again. The patient comes to you suffering from presenting
problems and symptoms caused by excessive anxiety or defenses. So their
appearance in the therapy is wonderful! Now you can help the patient
immediately overcome the causes of his problems.
Inviting the feeling has three stages, each of which can be blocked by
anxiety or a defense. Always follow the sequence: help the patient (1) label
the feeling, (2) experience the feeling, and (3) experience the impulse.
Stage One (labeling the feeling): “What is the feeling toward him?”
The patient may use many defenses to avoid declaring his feeling.
Each time, address the defense, and then invite the feeling. After
some defense work, the patient eventually says what he feels. Then
we arrive at the next stage.
Stage Two (experiencing the feeling): “How do you experience that
anger (or other feeling) physically in your body?” The patient may
use many defenses to avoid declaring how he experiences anger
physically in his body. Each time, point out the defense, and then
invite the experience of his feeling: “How do you experience that
rage physically in your body?” After more defense work, the
patient eventually declares how he experiences his anger physically
in his body. Then we arrive at the next stage.
Stage Three (experiencing the impulse): “What is the impulse that goes
with that rage?” “How do you experience that impulse physically in
your body?” The patient may ward off experiencing the impulse
that goes with his feeling. Address each defense, and then ask,
“How do you experience that impulse physically in your body?”
Once the patient can experience his impulse physically in his body,
he is ready for a breakthrough to the unconscious.
ANXIETY DURING THE PHASE OF INVITING FEELINGS
Addressing defenses is most of our work, but the topic of anxiety
deserves a brief comment. Anxiety is a good sign, signaling that
unconscious feelings are rising. All learning in therapy requires us to
tolerate an optimal level of anxiety for the sake of our growth. If anxiety is
too high, the brain cannot work properly, and new learning is impossible.
When anxiety is at an ideal level for learning, the patient faces what he
usually avoids and experiences anxiety in his striated muscles. (See chapter
2 on anxiety.)
When anxiety is too low, the patient is avoiding his feelings. He does
not learn what triggers his anxiety. Therapists who avoid anxiety-provoking
topics help patients avoid rather than master their difficulties.
Inviting feelings and addressing defenses mobilizes unconscious
feelings, triggering unconscious anxiety in the voluntary (striated) muscles.
Sighing and tensing of the muscles signal the rise of unconscious feelings
the patient usually avoids. This rise of anxiety in the striated muscles is a
sign of progress and no cause for concern. Treat the anxiety as a defense,
and then invite the feeling.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for hitting you?
Pt: I feel tense. [Anxiety in striated muscles.]
Th: That’s your anxiety. If we take that lid of anxiety off, could we take
a look at the feeling underneath? [Address anxiety as a defense, and
then invite the feeling.]
Each intervention triggering unconscious anxiety in the striated muscles
is on the right track: toward feelings. We refer to a rise of anxiety after an
intervention as unconscious signaling. If anxiety did not rise in the body,
the intervention did not mobilize feelings. Perhaps the intervention did not
focus on feelings, or it addressed the wrong defense. Every useful
intervention should mobilize unconscious feelings and anxiety.
Patients who are willing to tolerate anxiety to achieve their goals will
improve in therapy. Patients unwilling to tolerate anxiety will not improve.
We must show them how avoiding their anxiety imprisons them and defeats
their goals. Then they will turn against their defenses.
Pt: This is too uncomfortable.
Th: Obviously this anger makes you uncomfortable. Otherwise, you
would have faced it years ago. But if you keep avoiding this anger
that makes you uncomfortable, what will happen here?
Pt: I guess I won’t get better.
Th: Right. We have this choice. You can avoid what makes you
uncomfortable and have these symptoms, or you can face what
makes you uncomfortable so you can achieve your goals. What do
you think would be in your best interest?
Pt: I guess I have to look at this anger.
Th: You don’t have to. It’s a choice. You can keep avoiding this anger
that makes you uncomfortable, and you have the right to do so.
Pt: But I can’t keep going on like this.
Th: That’s not true. You have been going on like this for twenty years,
avoiding what makes you uncomfortable, and you can keep doing
that if it is giving you the results you want.
Pt: That’s just it. It’s not working anymore.
Before we go to a transcript, let us review the goal and principles when
inviting feelings. The goal of inviting feelings is to help the patient face and
experience previously avoided feelings so that he does not have to use
anxiety and defenses to avoid them. Once he no longer uses his defenses
against feeling, his symptoms and presenting problems will go away. To
achieve this goal, we follow three principles: (1) If the patient responds
with feeling, explore feeling, (2) If the patient responds with excessive
anxiety, regulate anxiety and then explore feeling, (3) If the patient
responds with defense, help the patient see and let go of the defense and
then explore feeling. Assess each patient response to see if it is a feeling,
anxiety, or defense. This response will determine your next intervention.
Patients with low resistance respond with feelings. Explore their
feelings.
Fragile patients respond with excessive anxiety. Regulate excessive
anxiety, and then focus on their feelings. Moderately and highly resistant
patients respond with defenses. Help these patients see and let go of their
defenses and then focus on feelings. See figure 1.1 to understand the three
basic choices when intervening.
Figure 1.1 Decision tree: inviting the feeling
We invite feelings in three stages. First, we ask what feeling the patient
has so he can label his feeling. Second, we ask how he experiences that
feeling physically in his body. Third, we ask how he experiences the
impulse that comes with that feeling. At each stage, anxiety or defenses
may cause a detour. Regulate anxiety and help the patient see his defenses
until he can go to the next stage. Then explore feelings at that level.
Table 1.1 illustrates the first two stages and sample responses of feeling,
anxiety, and defense.
Table 1.1 Phases in inviting feeling
SESSION ILLUSTRATING HOW TO MAINTAIN A FOCUS
ON FEELINGS
The following transcript is the initial session with a fifty-two-year-old
man. He called for an appointment, suffering from various somatic
complaints treated by his internist and a neurologist. He had been unable to
sleep regularly for thirteen years. A recent examination at a local sleep
clinic was inconclusive because the patient, without medications, slept
twenty-six minutes during the entire evening! He also suffered from panic
attacks, bowel complaints, headaches, shaking and trembling, and physical
collapses at work and elsewhere. After a sudden physical collapse at his job,
coworkers helped him into a car and took him home. His condition crippled
him so much he could no longer go to work regularly and had to conduct
office business by phone from his bed. Besides these conflicts, he took a
caretaker role with his wife, who had been diagnosed with a bipolar mood
disorder, and he feared sharing anything emotionally intimate with her.
The patient regarded all his somatic complaints as biological in origin
and saw no psychological precipitants. Those became clear only through
treatment. At the beginning of therapy he had no idea when his symptoms
had dramatically worsened. However, after a few sessions he realized his
symptoms first appeared after a beloved male boss left his organization and
worsened further still when he and a mentally ill coworker were assigned
the joint responsibility of managing his division. This worsening of physical
symptoms led him to seek treatment.
Doctors had treated him for several years with a wide range of
medications for anxiety, sleep, and seizure disorders. The doctors’ inability
to diagnose his condition and the possibility that he had Parkinson’s disease
left the patient fearing he was going to die soon because his condition had
worsened. We spoke on the phone before our appointment and he told me of
all his health issues. We agreed to meet, and his wife drove him to my office
because he was no longer able to drive long distances.
The patient begins the interview by describing a recent meeting with his
doctor. He told her he had made an appointment with me, a social worker.
She suggested he see a psychiatrist instead and go on medications. The
transcript begins about three minutes into the session.
Vignette One (minutes 3–5)
I start the interview by inviting the patient’s feelings.
Th: When you say you felt unhappy, what was the emotion you felt
toward her [the doctor]? [Stage one: invite the patient to label his
feeling.]
Pt: Well, I think the emotion I felt toward her was the fact that it was
like, “Well, a social worker’s not good enough. You need a
psychiatrist.” [Defense: Intellectualization. The patient does not
differentiate between his feeling and a defense.]
Th: That was your thought, presumably, but your feeling toward her?
Your emotion toward her? [Differentiate his defense of
intellectualization from his feeling, and then invite the feeling.]
Pt: I think my emotion toward her—a lot of that came down to the fact
that I had not had as much contact with her as I would have liked
during this process, you know? [Defense: rationalization. The
patient cannot differentiate his feeling from a defense.]
Th: That’s your thought. [Identify the defense.]
Pt: That’s my thought. [Begins to see the difference between his feeling
and a thought.]
Th: But your emotion toward her? Because you said it was a hot button.
The emotion toward her? [Invite the feeling.]
Pt: I think the emotion toward her was that her questioning the fact that,
well, you know, you need to see a psychiatrist. [Defense:
rationalization. Cannot differentiate his feeling from a defense.]
Th: It sounds like that was the reason you had an emotion, but what was
the emotion you had toward her? [Differentiate feeling from the
defense, and then ask about the feeling.]
Pt: What was the emotion I had toward her? I think it was … it was
frustration. [Defense: confusing the stimulus (she frustrated him)
with the feeling toward her for doing that.] It was like, I have what
I believe is a physical problem. You had raised this issue. The last
time I had the last bad physical event and had gone home and had
called her and talked with her, the first thing out from her was, “Do
you need a psychiatrist?” [Defense: rationalization.]
Th: She was obviously frustrating you, right? [Point out the stimulus.]
Pt: Right.
Th: And your emotion toward her for frustrating you? [Invite the
feeling.]
Pt: [Sighs. Indication of access to striated muscle pathway of anxiety
discharge.] I was not—I don’t think I was angry at her [The defense
of negation simultaneously represses and allows the anger to
emerge.], but I think it was a case of—I understood that she was—
[hand opens up].
Vignette Two (minutes 6–14)
I continue to invite the patient’s feeling.
Th: But the feeling toward her?
Pt: The emotion toward her was, “You’re not believing what I’m
saying. [Defense: intellectualization.]
Th: Well, that’s certainly the thought you had. [Identify the defense.]
Pt: [Switches leg position and becomes animated.] That was the
thought, you know.
Th: Yeah. But the emotion? [Invite the feeling.]
Pt: What’s the emotion? I think, at that time— [Sighs.] Like I said, was
I mad? Yeah, I was mad, sure. [Emergence of the patient’s anger.]
Th: Uh-huh, so you were angry with her then.
Pt: I was angry with her. I had a perception that she could just close this
off and say, “This is psychiatrist territory. I’m an internist. You need
a psychiatrist.”
Th: And that anger? How do you experience it even now? [Stage two:
invite the patient to describe how he experiences the anger in his
body.]
Pt: I’m in much more control, I think, of the situation. [Defense.]
Th: But if we don’t control the anger now, if we let ourselves have a
look at that right now, how do you experience that anger toward her
right now? [Identify the defense, invite the patient to turn against it,
and then invite the experience of the feeling.]
Pt: [Sighs.] How do I experience it now? [Sighs.] I really just didn’t
know exactly what to do at that point. I mean there was—
[Defense: rationalization.]
Th: But the anger? How do you experience that right now? [Block the
defense, and then invite the experience of the feeling.]
Pt: How do I feel about it right now? [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: How do you experience this anger toward her? [Invite the
experience of the feeling.]
Pt: [Sighs.] How do I? [Sighs.] I’m going to go in a little bit different
direction here. [Defense.]
The patient briefly describes how the doctor discusses his difficulties in
a dismissive way. This is the defense of diversification. His anxiety drops
because the therapist mistakenly follows the patient’s defense rather than
focuses on his feeling.
We return a minute later.
Th: But, if we come back—because you were obviously feeling quite
angry with her for saying, you need to see a psychiatrist, for
speaking to you in a clipped and dismissive manner. [Return the
focus to his feeling.]
Pt: Right.
Th: How do you experience that anger toward her right now? [Invite the
experience of the feeling.]
Pt: [Sighs.] I’m still frustrated, I mean— [Defense: confusing the
stimulus and his feeling. We could call frustrated a cover word.]
Th: But the anger? How do you experience the anger physically? [Invite
the experience of the feeling.]
Pt: [Sighs.] I have not made, you know—I go out. I walk. I try to let off
steam. I just try to say, look, you know, she is who she is. She is
trying to do her job, you know. [Defenses: discharge,
rationalization.]
Th: Let’s back up here. You feel angry with her. One of the ways you try
to deal with anger is you try to walk it off. [Identify and clarify the
patient’s defenses.]
Pt: Yeah.
Th: And you say another way you try to deal with anger is to kind of
steam it off.
Pt: Yeah.
Th: And another way you try to deal with anger is to come up with all
kinds of rationalizations.
Pt: Yeah.
Th: And these are all mechanisms that you’re using to deal with this
very powerful emotion coming up inside you.
Pt: Right.
Th: If we don’t rationalize away the anger, if we let ourselves have a
more honest look at that emotion right now, how do you experience
that emotion of anger toward her? [Invite him to drop his defense of
rationalization and describe the experience of his anger.]
Pt: [Sighs.] How am I experiencing?
Th: Yeah, physically.
Pt: Physically? Physically, how am I experiencing that anger toward
her? [Sighs.]
Th: Yeah.
Pt: [Sighs.] I have difficulty saying because I think I’m— As you said, I
put up these mechanisms. I’m throwing it up here, I’m throwing it
up here, and I’m saying— [Becomes aware of the defenses he uses
against anger.]
Th: Yeah.
Pt: I’m not going to, you know, swear at the lady or go bananas and say
— [Defense: negation.]
Th: In reality, obviously you’re not.
Pt: In reality, I’m not.
Th: But physically, if we just look, in the privacy of this room, as we’re
trying to understand this emotion—this is a powerful emotion—
how do you experience this emotion physically? [Invite the
experience of the feeling.]
Pt: [Sighs.] I think I’d go back to this abandonment thing of, you know.
[Defense: cover word.]
Th: Clearly she abandoned you in a certain sense, and this makes you
feel very angry toward her. And the anger, how do you experience
that physically? [Differentiate the defense from his feeling and
invite the experience of his feeling.]
Pt: How do I physically?
Th: Yeah, how do you experience that direct anger? [Invite the
experience of the feeling.]
Pt: [Sighs.] I hardly feel anything, and that’s the truth. [Defense.]
Th: You hardly feel anything?
Pt: I hardly feel anything right now. I mean, it’s just hard to—I just
really, right now, between this whole process, I’ve just kind of cut
all the emotional stuff off. [He sees his defense of cutting off
feelings.]
Th: It’s great you’re so honest here because what this shows is with the
tremendous anger that you feel toward this woman, one way you
deal with the anger is you almost deaden your emotions. You try to
deaden the rage. [Point out the link between his defense and his
collapses, i.e., his defenses are killing him.]
Pt: Yes. [Tears.]
Th: And then we see that another way is that you’re tempted to go to
tears as a way to cover up this very heated emotion, right? [Point
out how the tears cover up his anger.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: But obviously, you’ve not come here to deaden yourself or to be
dead, right? [Help the patient turn against his defenses, and remind
him of his underlying wish to become well.]
Pt: No.
Th: If we don’t deaden this anger, and if we don’t wash it away with
tears. [Encourage the patient to turn against his defenses.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: If we have a more honest look at that anger, how do you experience
this anger toward her? [Invite the experience of the feeling.]
Pt: [Sighs.] I’m trying. I guess it’s hard to dig in here. [Sighs.] I just
want to talk. Tell me if I’m not there. Ask questions please. [Sighs.]
I think she’s searching for the right answers. I’m just not confident
that she’s there. [Defense: rationalization.]
Th: That describes her, but if we take a look at the anger toward her?
How do you experience that? [Differentiate the defense from his
feeling, and then invite the experience of his anger.]
Pt: What am I feeling out of this? I guess … [The phrase “I guess” is
the beginning of the defense of hypothetical speech. Block that
defense by asking about his feeling again.]
Th: How do you experience this anger? [Invite the experience of the
feeling.]
Pt: What I’m feeling out of this anger is that [Sighs.] … I feel … that
I’m fighting to stay alive right now. [The patient says he is fighting
to stay alive: a rise in the therapeutic alliance. Unconsciously, he
indicates that he has been killing himself.]
Th: Hmm, fighting to stay alive. It sounds like you feel like you’re
alone in that fight. [Mirror the patient’s wish to stay alive.]
The patient begins to cry and tries to say something but cannot. Grief
emerges as he turns against the resistance. He continues to cry as he
becomes aware of how he kills himself slowly. We return several minutes
later to invite his experience of anger followed by a summary of his
defenses against the experience of anger, especially his use of immobility
(deadening his emotions and body).
Vignette Three (minutes 16–20)
I invite the patient to turn against his defenses.
Pt: [Sighs.] I think what’s going on, like I said, is that [Sighs.] …
Th: The anger? [Invite the feeling.]
Pt: The anger, the anger is clearly, you know [Sighs.] I want to live. I
don’t want to die. I want something done now. I don’t want to wait
two weeks, four weeks, six weeks, you know … [Rise in
unconscious therapeutic alliance.]
Th: And the anger? How do you experience it, physically, right now?
[Invite the experience of the feeling.]
Pt: Physically, right now? I’m upset. There’s no damn question I’m
upset. [Defense: cover word.]
Th: Ah, but you’re angry, right? [Point out the cover word upset.]
Pt: I am angry.
Th: And it’s very important we help you with any of your conflict
around anger because you need access to all the anger you’ve got in
your body—right?—to fight for your life.
Pt: Absolutely.
Th: Because if you deaden your anger, you could be dead, right? It
could be almost a form of suicide if you deaden your anger, right?
[Point out the price of his defenses, and mobilize the patient to let
go of his defenses.]
Pt: Right.
Th: Because you’re in a position that you are having to really fight for
your life. [Mobilize the patient’s will and help him engage in the
therapeutic task.]
Pt: I have to fight.
Th: If we don’t deaden the anger, let’s see if we can get to the bottom of
what this is all about. [Invite the feeling.]
Pt: Yeah.
The first breakthrough of the patient’s murderous rage occurred thirtysix minutes into the interview. The patient used the defenses of
intellectualization, rationalization, negation, immobility, and displacement.
Each time, I addressed the defense and then returned to the focus on feeling.
First, I asked about the feeling toward the doctor. After a series of defenses,
the patient could label his feeling as anger. When I asked how he
experienced the anger physically in his body, the patient immobilized
himself. When I addressed the patient’s defense of immobilization and the
patient turned against it, feeling and impulse rose in his body. Then the
patient displaced his rage onto stuff instead of toward the doctor who had
failed him. Once the patient turned against the defense of displacement, he
experienced the impulse to grab in his hands and body.
Questions
Sometimes, therapists who read this transcript or see the videotaped
case wonder, “Isn’t there a danger the patient will fall apart if he
experiences these feelings?” “Isn’t it possible that these feelings will hurt
the patient?” “Isn’t there a danger I could hurt the patient?” One of the most
important points to remember is this: feelings do not hurt the patient;
defenses hurt the patient. Feelings do not cause the patient’s suffering; his
defenses do. Feelings do not make the patient fall apart, his anxiety and
defenses can cause him to regress. If we regulate the patient’s anxiety and
address regressive defenses, we can help the patient face his feelings
quickly or gradually, according to his capacity. His defenses were creating
his suffering before he came to your office. You do not cause his suffering.
He causes his suffering through defenses, which he does not see. Your task
is to focus on his feelings and help him see and turn against his defenses.
Lastly, in learning any treatment method, we make mistakes. Patients will
nearly always forgive a mistake of the head, just not one of the heart.
Another question therapists ask is this: “If the patient does not know
what he is feeling, why do you persist?” Due to defenses, the patient cannot
know what he is feeling yet. He needs practice seeing his defenses and
letting go of them before he will gain access to his feelings. If we use a
neuroscience metaphor, his prefrontal cortex is not getting much
information from his limbic system. So he won’t know what his feelings are
at first. We understand that the patient is giving the best answers he can. Yet
if we keep asking for feelings, we keep building new neural connections
between his prefrontal cortex and the subcortical regions of his brain. Think
of learning to catch a ball when you were a child. You kept missing the ball
or dropping it. But your father kept throwing the ball time after time while
your brain kept forming new neural connections until you could catch that
ball. The same principle is at work here. Through repetition we give the
patient’s brain a chance to form the neural connections so that he can
recognize what he is feeling in his body.
SUMMARY
This case illustrates how to focus on feelings and identify defenses for
patients with low and moderate resistance. From an evolutionary
perspective, emotions allow us to react automatically to changes in the
environment. From an interpersonal perspective, whenever we become
close to others, nonconscious appraisal in the brain mobilizes feelings in the
body. These feelings allow us to communicate with one another. They are
the glue of our relationships. They “have healing power because they are …
the primary mediators of social life” (Trevarthen 2009, 55). Feelings also
strengthen our learning and memories. From a motivational perspective,
feelings reveal which of our needs are met or unfulfilled. They propel us
toward what we want. From the perspective of neuroscience (Damasio
1999), feelings provide us with our core consciousness. From the
perspective of development, exchanging feelings is the basis of our
intellectual and cultural development. And from an existential perspective,
feelings reveal to us the value and meaning of our lives. Feelings “most
profoundly shape our personhood and are most central to being human”
(Gaylin 1990, 78).
We invite feelings to help the patient dare to become emotionally close
again, after a life in which closeness led to pain. These feelings trigger
anxiety and defenses. Defenses prevent the patient from being aware of his
feelings, interfering with his sense of self, relationships, motivation,
development, and even the meaning of his life. Thus, the therapist focuses
on the feelings the patient avoids. When anxiety and defense arise, the
therapist points out these “detours” and then invites the patient to face his
feelings instead. How we do this varies according to the patient’s strengths
and weaknesses. This book contains numerous vignettes that illustrate how
to handle those detours so the patient can face his feelings and channel them
adaptively into action rather than suffer from anxiety and symptoms. Now
we will explore the two major detours from feeling: anxiety and defenses.
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Malan, D. (1979). The dialogue of therapy and the two triangles. In
Individual psychotherapy and the science of psychodynamics (pp. 74–
94). London: Butterworths.
Malan, D., and Coughlin Della Selva, P. (2006). Introduction to the theory
and technique of Davanloo’s ISTDP. In Lives transformed: A
revolutionary method of dynamic psychotherapy (pp. 10–33). London:
Karnac.
RECOMMENDED MATERIALS
If you would like to learn how to address defenses and maintain an
effective focus, you can receive a free audio skill-building course by
subscribing at http://www.istdpinstitute.com.
A
CHAPTER TWO
Anxiety: The First Detour from Feelings
nxiety is a term that is widely used yet almost universally
misunderstood. In the first part of this chapter we will define
anxiety, its function, and its causes. Then we will differentiate
anxiety from common misconceptions. And finally, we will describe the
biological underpinnings of anxiety. In the second part of this chapter we
will describe how to assess the discharge of anxiety into the patient’s body,
and how to assess when anxiety is too high, requiring regulation. Then we
show a variety of techniques for regulating anxiety. In the third part of this
chapter we show how to assess patients where anxiety regulation does not
work. Here we show how to work with defenses that prevent anxiety
regulation.
DEFINITIONS
What do we mean by the term anxiety? The affect of fear consists of the
nonconscious detection of threat (Damasio 1999). The emotion of fear
refers to the unconscious activation of the body by the somatic and
autonomic nervous systems (Damasio 1999). These systems create the
symptoms of the pounding heart and sweating palms. The feeling of anxiety
refers to our conscious awareness of these bodily sensations (Damasio
1999).
We call these symptoms fear when they are triggered by objective
threats or call them anxiety when they are triggered by our feelings (A.
Freud 1936). Therapy focuses on anxiety triggered by feelings in a session.
This emotional activation of the body supports defensive responses such as
fight/flight and immobilization (Porges 1995). Thus, we must differentiate
nonconscious threat detection (Panksepp 1998, 2009), nonconscious
mobilization of emotion in the body (Damasio 1999; Panksepp 1998); and
defensive responses (fight/flight and immobilization) (Porges 1995, 2001a,
2001b, 2011; Porges and Bazhenova 2006) from conscious awareness of the
feeling of anxiety in the body (Damasio 1999).
Anxiety signals that feelings inside us are a threat. We cannot run away
from them; we can only “hide” them by using defenses. Fear mobilizes the
body to protect itself physically (Panksepp 1998), whereas anxiety
mobilizes us to defend ourselves psychologically (S. Freud 1926/1961d).
The Function of Anxiety
Anxiety has a different function from other feelings: to signal and
prepare the body to respond to danger. This involves four steps. First, a
system prewired in the brain, inherited from the mammals (Panksepp 1998,
2012), nonconsciously assesses danger and sends a message to the
amygdala. Second, the amygdala activates the somatic and autonomic
nervous systems (Goldstein 2006), creating the emotion of fear in the body
(Damasio 1999). Briefly, the somatic nervous system activates the
voluntary muscles so we can run from, or fight with, an attacker. For those
muscles to act externally, the autonomic nervous system must support them
internally (LeDoux 1998). Third, now that the body has been activated, we
can engage in defensive actions to fight with, flee from, or surrender to
objective threats (Porges 1995, 2001a, 2001b, 2011; Porges and Bazhenova
2006; Kennard 1947). Fourth, we can become conscious of these bodily
symptoms and label them as the feeling of anxiety (Damasio 1999).
How does anxiety prepare the body to act? When the amygdala
mobilizes the somatic and autonomic nervous systems, the sympathetic
branch of the ANS raises our pulse, breath rate, and blood pressure,
withdrawing blood from the extremities and redirecting it to the large
muscles so we can run or fight. That is why our hands and feet get cold.
Other symptoms include dry mouth, dry eyes, constipation, and dilated
pupils (Goldstein 2006; Hamill and Shapiro 2004).
The parasympathetic branch of the ANS lowers our pulse, breath rate,
and blood pressure, resulting in a drop of blood flow to the brain. This
creates symptoms of blurry vision, ringing in the ears, problems thinking,
dizziness, nausea, diarrhea, and migraines. Other symptoms include
increased salivation, teary eyes, constricted pupils, warm hands, cardiac
arrhythmia, bodily anesthesia, and limpness (Goldstein 2006; Hamill and
Shapiro 2004; McEwen, Bulloch, and Stewart 1999). This parasympathetic
reaction enables animals to go limp when attacked by a predator and
sometimes escape being eaten. The somatic and autonomic nervous systems
create the symptoms of anxiety in our bodies (Goldstein 2006) in less than a
second, before we consciously think about or see a threat (Ohman and
Wiens 2003).
Yet if fear and anxiety allow us to survive, why are they such a
problem? Fear can be an adaptive response to an objective threat or a
maladaptive reaction to a misperceived cue. The emotion system designed
for the jungle operates today in human relationships. However, we no
longer have to fear dangers like saber-toothed tigers, just the occasional
crazy driver.
To survive, animals must avoid predators; humans must avoid the loss
of relationships. Many mammals live independently when only a few weeks
old. We, however, cannot. Children rely on others to survive. Therefore, any
feeling threatening the safety of our primary relationship endangers our
survival (Bowlby 1969, 1973, 1980), triggering anxiety (Evans 1996; H. S.
Sullivan 1953a, 1953b). Why does anxiety cause so many problems? A
single experience is enough for a relationship-threatening feeling to trigger
anxiety for a lifetime. Fear memories are permanent (Fanselow and Dale
2003).
The Causation of Anxiety
Milliseconds after anxiety symptoms are mobilized in the body, the
amygdala sends a message to the prefrontal cortex, which is responsible for
thinking and decision making, and can send corrective feedback. So
conscious thought occurs after unconscious detection of a threat and
mobilization of the body. According to LeDoux (1998), an unconscious cue
triggers the amygdala and hypothalamus, which activate the autonomic
nervous system, creating anxiety symptoms throughout the body. Then a
message goes to the cortex, which provides feedback to the amygdala after
it has already triggered the anxiety symptoms. Therefore, the body reacts
before the prefrontal cortex can provide feedback regarding a visible cue:
“Those stripes in the grass are just some sticks, not a tiger. You’re safe.”
In relationships, unconscious threats (such as emotions) are more
difficult to evaluate because they are invisible. For instance, I ask a patient
what feeling is triggering her anxiety. She thinks she is anxious because of a
test she will take in three weeks. Her anxiety rises and falls in the session,
yet the supposed cue (the exam) remains the same. Thus, the test cannot be
the trigger. Then she remembers: her uncle just died. His death reminds her
of her father’s death, and her anxiety rises. Sadness is the trigger.
The threat-detection system we share with reptiles and mammals
predates the evolution of the human prefrontal cortex and operates
independently of it. We are anxious bodily before we know it cognitively.
How adaptive! Imagine if one of our ancestors had seen a tiger and then
thought, “Hmm. That looks like a furry quadruped running toward me. It
certainly has large teeth.” Crunch! He would have become dinner.
At the beginning of the session, the patient had forgotten her sadness.
She was unable to scan her “internal savannah” for the feeling triggering
her anxiety. As a result, she could only speculate about the trigger and
decided it must be the test. This example shows how feelings, which are
invisible, cause anxiety. Patients often do not recognize these invisible
feelings because early in life they learned to ignore the feelings that made
their caretakers anxious. (“My sadness makes Mom nervous. If I ignore it,
she won’t be upset, and our relationship will be secure.”) Once ignoring
feelings becomes an unconscious, automatic habit, we no longer know what
triggers our anxiety. When a feeling enters the room, our bodies react as if it
were a tiger, and we consciously do not know why. Let’s look at the issue of
causality.
Correct causality: The patient experiences a feeling (sadness about
her father’s death) that triggers anxiety (racing heart, sweating
palms, and tense muscles) that triggers a defense (rumination about
the test) distracting her from her sadness.
Incorrect causality: The patient thinks a test she will take in three
weeks (defense of displacement) triggers her anxiety today.
The defense of displacement distracted her from her sadness, providing
a reasonable explanation for her anxiety. As long as she avoided her grief,
however, it pushed for expression, triggering her anxiety. Once she faced
her sadness and grieved, her anxiety lessened, as her defense was no longer
necessary. Sadness made her anxious because her abusive family
condemned any expression of feelings.
The right hemisphere of the brain stores an internal working model of a
child’s relationships, determining how she handles her feelings (Schore
2002, 14). A securely attached person accepts her feelings and regulates her
anxiety by paying careful attention to it. She regulates herself as others
regulated her.
In contrast, an insecurely attached person reacts as if others will reject
her feelings and anxiety. Feelings, perceived as dangerous, trigger
unconscious memories of early relationships, which take the form of
anxiety (Schore 2002, 21). The hippocampus, immature until the third or
fourth year of life, remembers only the quality of early experiences—the
somatic sensations and behaviors (De Rijk, Kitraki, and De Kloet 2010,
142; O’Keefe and Nadel 1978). Feelings trigger anxiety: bodily memories
of an insecure attachment, sensations when anxiety was not regulated.
These primordial representations of bodily states are the foundation on
which all emotional growth and future experience proceeds.
Having clarified the concept of causality, let’s clear up a few
misconceptions about anxiety.
Anxiety Is Not a Stimulus
The literature on psychotherapy has described separation anxiety,
related to losing a loved one; castration anxiety, related to damage to your
body or genitals; moral anxiety, related to transgressing one’s values;
annihilation anxiety, related to being invaded and destroyed; fragmentation
anxiety, related to self-disintegration; and persecutory anxiety, related to the
belief that others want to hurt you (Waelder 1960). However, these are
stimuli, not anxiety. If someone threatens to mutilate your genitals, you will
feel anxiety in your body. However, castration is a stimulus or fantasy, not
the resulting bodily state of anxiety.
Anxiety Is Not a Thought
A patient is angry with a professor who contemptuously criticized his
paper in front of a class. Afterward he is afraid that the professor wants to
attack him physically. Anger triggers his anxiety. Once he projects his rage
onto the professor, he believes the professor makes him anxious, not his
anger. This thought (“I fear him”) results from projection. Anger causes his
anxiety; projection creates his thought (table 2.1).
Table 2.1 The causality of anxiety
Sequence
in time
Element of conflict Description
1 Feeling “I am angry with him.”
2 Anxiety (bodily
experience)
Blurry vision, ringing in the ears, and
nausea.
3 Defense of
projection (thought)
“I am not angry. My professor is angry
with me.”
4 Consequence
(thought)
“I fear him.”
The patient fears the projection he has
placed on the professor.
Anxiety Is an Unconscious Biophysiological Activation Pattern
in the Body
Always differentiate thoughts in the mind (defense) from the feeling in
the body (anxiety). To make this easier to see, table 2.2 lists the bodily
symptoms of anxiety created by the somatic and autonomic (sympathetic
and parasympathetic) nervous systems (Goldstein 2006; Hamill and Shapiro
2004).
Table 2.2. Bodily symptoms of anxiety
Anxiety symptoms
caused by the somatic
nervous system
Clenched thumbs and hands
Tension headaches
Tense arms, shoulders, and neck.
Sighing: tension in the intercostal muscles
Tight stomach muscles, tension in feet and legs
Fibromyalgia
Chronic tensing of the pelvic muscles, resulting in
painful sensations, painful menstruation, painful
intercourse, menstrual irregularity, and vulvadynia
Anxiety symptoms
caused by the
sympathetic nervous
system
Dry mouth
Dry eyes
Dilated pupils
Cold hands
Increased heart rate, blood pressure, and
respiration
Blushing
Decreased motility of the gastrointestinal tract:
constipation
Constricted bladder sphincter: urinary retention)
Shivering
Piloerection (hair stands on end due to muscle
contraction)
Hyperventilation and fainting
Anxiety symptoms
caused by the
parasympathetic
nervous system
Salivation
Teary eyes
Constricted pupils
Warm hands
Decreased heart rate, blood pressure, and
respiration
Increased motility of the gastrointestinal tract:
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
Relaxed bladder sphincter: urge to urinate
Migraines (due to vasodilation)
Cardiac arrhythmia
Dizziness
Foggy thinking
Bodily anesthesia
Limpness
We’ll refer to three patterns of unconscious anxiety discharge in the
body (table 2.3): striated muscles, smooth muscles, and
cognitive/perceptual disruption (H. Davanloo, supervision 2002–2004),
each of which is created by the somatic and autonomic nervous systems.
Table 2.3 Pathways of unconscious anxiety discharge
Anxiety symptoms in the
striated muscles
Hand clenching
Tension in the intercostal muscles of the
chest—sighing
Tension in arms, shoulders, neck, legs,
and feet
Jaw clenching, biting
Tension headaches
Anxiety symptoms in the
smooth muscles
Bladder urgency and frequency
Gastrointestinal spasm: irritable bowel
syndrome, nausea, vomiting
Vascular symptoms: migraine,
hypertension
Bronchi symptoms: asthma
“Jelly legs”: unsteady gait due to lack of
tension (striated access)
Anxiety Symptoms in
Cognitive/Perceptual
Disruption
Drifting, dissociation, confusion, losing
track of thoughts, poor memory
Visual blurring, tunnel vision, blindness
Anesthesia: sudden loss of feeling in
areas of the body
Fainting, freezing, fugue states, dizziness
Hallucinations
Ringing in the ears
Projection, projective identification
In summary, nonconscious threat detection (affect) produces a
biophysiological activation in the body (emotion) (Damasio 1999). Fear is
the bodily reaction triggered by an objective danger. Anxiety is the bodily
reaction triggered by a feeling (A. Freud 1936). Fear prepares the body to
engage in defensive behaviors in response to external dangers. Anxiety
triggers the mind to use psychological defenses to ward off internal feelings
perceived as dangerous in a relationship.
ASSESSMENT OF THE PATHWAYS OF UNCONSCIOUS
ANXIETY DISCHARGE
Every time you intervene during a session, you invite the patient to form
a therapeutic alliance. This triggers feelings and anxiety based on past
relationships. After each intervention, assess the following:
1. What is the pathway of unconscious anxiety discharge? If striated
muscles, explore feelings and address defenses. If smooth muscles
or cognitive/perceptual disruption, regulate the anxiety until it
returns to the striated muscles, and then explore feelings.
2. How rapidly does the anxiety rise and fall? If a patient’s anxiety
rises slowly during the session when you explore feelings and drops
quickly when you pay attention to it, the patient regulates her
anxiety well. You can safely explore feelings. A rapid rise and slow
fall of anxiety indicate poor anxiety regulation, possible regressive
defenses, and lingering effects of neuroendocrine discharge. For
instance, a patient may become sick to her stomach or project at the
beginning of the session. These signs reveal a fast rise of anxiety. In
such a case, regulate the anxiety until it returns to the striated
muscles, and then explore feelings.
3. Can the patient observe and pay attention to her anxiety? If so,
explore the feeling under the anxiety. If not, help her observe and
regulate her anxiety.
4. Does anxiety regulation work? If not, identify the defenses
preventing the patient from observing, paying attention to, and
regulating her anxiety.
Assessment of Anxiety and Self-Observing Capacity
When anxiety regulation does not work, assess the patient’s
1. Anxiety in her body
2. Ability to observe, pay attention to, and regulate it
3. Defenses, which prevent her from observing, paying attention to,
and regulating her anxiety
When the patient cannot observe, pay attention, or regulate her anxiety,
she uses defenses, which prevent her from doing so. Assessing these
defenses is essential to make anxiety regulation possible.
How the Patient Walks In
We can begin assessing the patient’s anxiety as soon as he enters the
room by noticing his gait. A patient with striated muscle tension walks
energetically, with an erect posture and an expressive or tense face. In
contrast, a patient whose anxiety goes into his smooth muscles or
cognitive/perceptual disruption enters slowly, perhaps a bit wobbly on his
feet due to a lack of tension in his muscles (“jelly legs”). He sits in a
slumped and tired posture, his face expressionless. When interventions
evoke no tension or sighing, immediately assess his anxiety.
Response to Intervention
Now we will look at some transcripts that show how to assess the
patient’s pathway of unconscious anxiety discharge. The first transcript is a
clinical example of striated muscle discharge created by the somatic
nervous system.
Th: Could we look at an example of when this is a problem for you?
Pt: [Sighs.] Well, a couple days ago she told me she wanted to dump
me.
Th: What is your feeling toward her for saying that?
Pt: [Sighs. Shifts in chair.] Well, I didn’t like it. [Defense:
intellectualization.]
Th: Of course, what is the feeling toward her for saying that?
Pt: [Sighs. Wiggles fingers.] I was angry.
Each time the therapist asks about emotional material, the patient
becomes tense, sighs, and shifts in his chair. The patient’s sighs and
fidgeting indicate that his anxiety is discharged into the striated muscles.
Patients whose unconscious anxiety is discharged only into striated muscles
use isolation of affect as a defense. They can tell you what they feel but not
how they experience the feeling. You can pursue high levels of feeling (H.
Davanloo, supervision 2002–2004).
Unconscious Signaling
After the therapist intervenes, unconscious bodily signs of anxiety
signal a rise of unconscious feelings (H. Davanloo, supervision 2002–
2004) within one second. This unconscious signaling occurs when the
patient’s statement or the therapist’s intervention triggers unconscious
feelings. Now you know what topic to explore or which obstacle to focus
on.
When interventions do not trigger unconscious signaling, you are not
focusing effectively on feeling, anxiety is discharged into the smooth
muscles or cognitive/perceptual disruption, or defenses are operating. If you
shift the focus to the feeling and the patient sighs, you are back on track,
getting closer to unconscious feelings. If anxiety goes into the smooth
muscles or cognitive/perceptual disruption, regulate the anxiety until it
returns to the striated muscles. When signaling stops due to defenses, help
the patient see and let go of those defenses.
Suppose a patient is angry with his girlfriend, who cruelly dumped him
for another man. As you ask about his anger, he covers it with thoughts.
Signaling will drop if you listen to his defense of intellectualization, but it
will rise if you point out his defense and invite him to feel his anger.
Another patient says he wants to face his grief over the loss of his wife.
Is he being compliant? Assess his unconscious signaling. A sigh signaling
anxiety shows that his genuine wish to grieve triggers feelings and anxiety.
A lack of unconscious signaling shows that this defense of compliance
represses rather than triggers feelings. Genuine feelings trigger unconscious
anxiety; defenses such as compliance do not.
Unconscious signaling allows us to assess the pathways of unconscious
anxiety discharge. Since anxiety can get too high, let’s review the
continuum of unconscious anxiety discharge.
How Anxiety Is Discharged in the Patient’s Body
Since the pathway of anxiety discharge tells us what form of treatment
to offer and where we should focus our work, we will now illustrate the
range of responses patients offer so you can correctly assess a patient’s
pathway of unconscious anxiety discharge.
Patients with a High Capacity for Anxiety Tolerance: Striated Muscles
A patient with a high capacity for anxiety tolerance describes her
presenting problem clearly with little anxiety. As you explore her
difficulties, she will sigh, fidget with her hands, become tense, or shift
positions in her chair—signs of anxiety in the striated muscles. She licks
her lips, indicating a dry mouth (sympathetic nervous system). She
intellectualizes and thinks clearly while her anxiety rises. Invite her to
explore her problem and her feelings: “Could we take a look at a specific
example of this problem?”
Patients Who Exceed the Threshold for Anxiety Tolerance: Smooth
Muscles
A patient describes her problems clearly but with elevated anxiety. She
first exhibits a dry mouth, some tension, and an elevated heart and breathing
rate. As her feelings intensify, her anxiety shifts from the striated muscles
into the smooth muscles. Now she exceeds the threshold for anxiety
tolerance. She experiences nausea or the beginning of a migraine headache,
her tension drops, her sighing stops, and she becomes limp.
When her tension drops and she becomes limp, she has just exceeded
the threshold of anxiety tolerance. Now her repressive defenses of
intellectualization and isolation of affect shift to regressive defenses such as
projection and externalization. Rather than explore her problem, regulate
her anxiety immediately to prevent a regression. To regulate the patient’s
anxiety, focus her attention on her bodily symptoms. Describe the triangle
of conflict (feeling, anxiety, and defense) several times. “Do you notice how
your anxiety just shot up? So we see you were feeling angry with your
boyfriend, you became anxious, and your anxiety caused a stomachache.
Do you see that too?” Then invite her to repeat back what she heard. Once
her anxiety returns to the striated muscles, explore feeling again.
Patients Who Enter the Session Already Exceeding the Threshold for
Anxiety Tolerance: Smooth Muscles and Cognitive/Perceptual
Disruption
A patient who enters a session already exceeding the threshold for
anxiety tolerance sits slumped in the chair without tension in her body. She
does not sigh or clench her hands. She describes her difficulties in a
disorganized fashion, her vocal tone is flat, and her face is affectless. She
has no access to striated muscle discharge of anxiety.
When asked whether she feels anxious, she may say no. She does not
realize that her limpness, nausea, blurry vision, and cognitive confusion are
symptoms of anxiety. The absence of tension (making her look superficially
calm) is a sign of high anxiety discharged into the smooth muscles and
cognitive/perceptual disruption. Regulate her anxiety immediately.
Otherwise, she will begin to use regressive defenses such as projection, and
her ability to differentiate you from her projection will disappear (Fonagy et
al. 2002; Segal 1981).
The most severely anxious patients enter therapy already suffering from
cognitive/perceptual disruption and projection. They equate the therapist
with their projections, fearing (or feeling angry with) him.
They project their desire to understand themselves onto the therapist
(“What are you trying to find out?”). They project their desire for the
therapy (“Where is this therapy going?”). Or they project their will (“What
do you want me to do?”). First, deactivate the projection to develop a
therapeutic alliance. (See the example on pp. 53–56.) Once the projection
has dropped, regulate the anxiety triggered by the underlying feeling. (See
chapter 6.)
Some severely anxious patients are tense from head to toe. Tension
without sighing or wringing of the hands is a freeze reaction, not striated
muscle discharge of anxiety. These patients engage in thoracic rather than
abdominal breathing and suffer from cognitive/perceptual disruption. They
project a frightening image and then fear the therapist, freeze, or go limp
(Scaer 2001). The patient’s fearful look, shifting gaze, or angry glare are
signs of projection.
Patients who dissociate usually experience a freeze response. They have
symptoms of parasympathetic dominance (drop in blood pressure, slacking
of tense muscles, and immobilization of the body) plus sympathetic
activation (racing heart). High levels of endorphins cause numbness,
dissociation, and amnesia and impair memory (Scaer 2001, 17, 2005). To
regulate the anxiety, deactivate the projections (see pp. 75–77) and
restructure time/space distortion (see “When Anxiety Regulation Does Not
Work,” pp. 78–82).
Once the patient can differentiate the therapist from the projection, the
freeze response drops, and sighing respiration and hand clenching return.
Then explore feelings. Just as reptiles become still when they cannot flee
from a predator, some hypothesize that children freeze when they cannot
escape from an abuser (Scaer 2001, 2005; Schulkin 2004). The same freeze
response can occur when adults relive memories of traumas, losing the
ability to differentiate the past from the present.
Why Does High Anxiety Create Cognitive/Perceptual
Disruption?
The autonomic nervous system impairs cognitive functioning by
decreasing blood flow to the brain while increasing the release of
neurohormones.
Blood flow: The parasympathetic nervous system causes a sudden
drop in blood flow to the brainstem (Goldstein 2006), the frontal
lobe (Arnsten 1997, 1998a, 1998b; Birnbaum et al. 1999), and
Broca’s area (Rauch et al. 1996). In response, the patient faints
(Ziegler 2004), has trouble finding words to describe his experience,
and loses consciousness and postural tone in sessions (Goldstein
2004, 103; Kaufmann 2004). Now the prefrontal cortex (Wehrenberg
and Prinz 2007), no longer able to inhibit the amygdala (Grawe
2007) and the fear response, becomes less capable of executive
functioning (Austin 2006).
Neuroendocrine discharge: High levels of endorphins prevent
explicit, declarative memory from forming (Newcomer et al. 1999)
and consolidating (Scaer 2001). High cortisol levels damage the
hippocampus (Sapolsky et al. 1990), reducing its size, which impairs
learning (Lupien et al. 1998), executive functioning, and selfregulation (Blair, Granger, and Razza 2005). Stress hormones divert
blood glucose away from the hippocampus to the striated muscles.
This prevents the anxious patient from forming new memories or
retrieving long-term memories in therapy.
Developmental physiology: The repeated experience of severe
anxiety during childhood causes cortisol releases to increase in
frequency, further damaging the hippocampus. Physiologically, the
hippocampus shrinks and the amygdala enlarges (Bremner et al.
1995, 2000; McEwen and Sapolsky 2000, 182; Sheline et al. 1996;
Sheline, Gado, and Kraemer 2003), compromising brain
development and creating the neurological basis for anxiety
disorders. This altered development impairs the capacity for storing
and retrieving new learning in therapy (Sapolsky 2004) and the
ability to inhibit the amygdala. The patient’s conditioned fear
responses become stronger, and cognitive functioning decreases,
making anxiety regulation more difficult.
In summary, symptoms of cognitive/perceptual disruption result from a
drop in blood flow to the brain, a fall in the heart rate (the heart may even
stop beating for a few seconds), and increased releases of adrenaline and
other neurohormones (Goldstein 2004, 2006). Excessive anxiety impairs the
patient’s capacity to store, encode, and retrieve new information. All these
causes explain why anxious patients suffer from cognitive difficulties.
However, anxiety regulation can restore neurological functioning, reversing
some brain deficits. That is why we begin regulating anxiety as soon as it
goes over the threshold of anxiety tolerance.
The Threshold of Anxiety Tolerance
We help patients experience as much feeling as possible while anxiety is
discharged into the striated muscles. That is the threshold of anxiety
tolerance. When anxiety goes out of the striated muscles into the smooth
muscles or cognitive/perceptual disruption, the patient has gone over that
threshold and needs anxiety regulation. When patients experience their
anxiety in the striated muscles, explore feelings and treat anxiety as a
defense.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for hitting you?
Pt: I feel tense. [The patient’s anxiety is discharged into her striated
muscles. She cannot differentiate her feeling from anxiety.]
Th: Tension is your anxiety. [Differentiate the feeling from anxiety.] If
you don’t cover your feeling toward him with anxiety, what is the
feeling toward him for hitting you?
Pt: I’m angry.
Sometimes the patient enters the session with anxiety triggered by
feelings toward the therapist.
Pt: I feel anxious today.
Th: It’s good you notice that. When did you start feeling anxious?
Pt: I felt fine when I woke up, but I started feeling anxious when I
thought about coming here and as I was driving here. [This suggests
that feelings toward the therapist are triggering her anxiety.]
Th: You became anxious when you were thinking about coming here
today. I wonder what feelings you are having here toward me that
could be making you anxious?
Pt: [Sighs. Discharge of unconscious anxiety (sigh) indicates that
feelings toward the therapist are triggering her anxiety.] I feel fine,
but there was something you said last time I didn’t like.
Th: What was that?
Pt: You said I sabotaged my relationship with my boyfriend. [After
exploring what happened, explore the feelings.]
Th: It sounds like you have a reaction to that. What is the feeling toward
me?
Facing feelings toward the therapist is a corrective emotional
experience. The patient learns to deal with her feelings adaptively in the
here and now.
Events outside the therapy also trigger the patient’s anxiety.
Th: You seem anxious. When did that begin? [Find out the stimulus.]
Pt: I think it started Thursday.
Th: What happened on Thursday that could have triggered your
anxiety?
Pt: I don’t know. It was a regular day. I got up. I visited my professor to
talk about my dissertation because he had some reservations about
it.
Th: Would you like to take a look at that?
Pt: He said the statistics were completely wrong, even though I had
followed his instructions exactly. Then he said I have to do that
section all over again.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for doing that?
Pt: [Sighs.] I’m really ticked off. [Anxiety is in the striated muscles:
explore the feeling.]
Th: “Ticked off” is vague. If you don’t cover the feeling with
vagueness, what is the feeling toward him? [Differentiate the
feeling from the defense of vagueness.]
Pt: I’m angry with him.
Th: You feel angry with him, and this anger makes you anxious. Then
you deal with the anger by being a little vague. Do you notice that
too? [Triangle of conflict.]
In this example, the patient’s anxiety was in the striated muscles.
However, when anxiety shifts from the striated muscles into the smooth
muscles and cognitive/perceptual disruption, the patient goes over her
threshold of anxiety tolerance (H. Davanloo, supervision 2002–2004).
When this occurs, stop exploring feelings. Regulate the anxiety until it
returns to the striated muscles. Then explore feelings again, gradually
building the patient’s affect tolerance. This method is called the graded
format (Whittemore 1996).
Principle: When anxiety goes into the smooth muscles or
cognitive/perceptual disruption, stop exploring feelings and
regulate the anxiety until it returns to the striated muscles.
Then you can explore feelings again.
The Graded Format
In the graded format, the therapist explores feelings until the patient’s
anxiety shifts into the smooth muscles or cognitive/perceptual disruption.
The therapist regulates the anxiety until the patient’s anxiety returns to
striated muscles and then explores feelings again. By alternately exploring
feelings and regulating anxiety, the therapist shifts the patient’s anxiety into
the striated muscles, builds the patient’s feeling tolerance, and reduces the
use of regressive defenses.
When the patient’s anxiety goes into the smooth muscles or
cognitive/perceptual disruption, follow these steps:
1. Stop exploring feelings.
2. Draw the patient’s attention to her anxiety symptoms.
3. Help her see the sequence: stimulus, feeling, anxiety, and
symptoms.
4. Describe the sequence until the patient’s symptoms disappear.
5. Then explore feelings in a different relationship.
The Graded Format in Action
The following vignette shows how to assess when anxiety is too high,
how to use the graded format to regulate the patient’s anxiety, and how to
explore feelings again. A depressed patient has described his conflicts with
a verbally abusive daughter who lied about her drug use.
Th: What is the feeling toward her for doing that?
Pt: I’m getting a migraine. [He has exceeded his threshold for anxiety
tolerance. Stop exploring the feeling; regulate the anxiety.]
Th: It’s good you notice. This headache is a sign of anxiety. Are you
aware of feeling anxious right now? [Draw attention to the
anxiety.]
Pt: Not really. I’m just aware of feeling this headache. [He is not aware
of his anxiety.]
Th: You notice the headache. What do you feel in your stomach right
now? [Help him see other anxiety symptoms.]
Pt: A little queasy.
Th: That’s another sign of anxiety. You’ve got this headache and a sick
stomach, and those are two signs of anxiety. [Draw his attention to
his anxiety.]
Pt: I didn’t know that was anxiety. I feel that a lot.
Th: You have these symptoms of anxiety a lot. So it’s important to
notice that you had some feeling toward your daughter for lying to
you. Then that feeling triggered this anxiety, which took the form of
your headache and queasy stomach. Do you see that now? [Draw
his attention to causality: feeling triggers anxiety.]
Pt: I see it now, but I didn’t see it before.
Th: You just saw the headache, but now we see you felt something
toward your daughter for lying to you, and that triggered anxiety,
which went into your headache and in your stomach. [Causality.]
How are your headache and stomach now? [Assess if his anxiety
has dropped.]
Pt: The headache is gone and the stomach is okay. [His anxiety has
dropped quickly, so ask about the feeling again.]
Th: Would you like to take a look at this feeling you had toward your
daughter so we can help you feel your feeling instead of anxiety?
[Mobilize the patient to the task.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: What is the feeling toward your daughter for lying to you?
Pt: Frustrated. [He confuses the stimulus (what his daughter did) with
his feeling toward her.]
Th: Sure. She frustrated you by lying to you. What is your feeling
toward her for doing that? [Differentiate the stimulus from his
reactive feeling.]
Pt: I feel angry.
Explore feelings as deeply as possible while the anxiety goes into the
striated muscles. As soon as the anxiety shifts into the smooth muscles or
cognitive/perceptual disruption, regulate it. Once tension returns to the
striated muscles, explore feelings again.
Some patients remain in a chronic state of free-floating anxiety during
which the social engagement system (eye gaze, gesture, facial affect, vocal
tone, control of the middle ear, orienting reflex) remains neurologically
unavailable (Porges 2001a, 2001b, 2011). To regulate the patient’s anxiety,
focus on her body. Describe the triangle of conflict (feeling, anxiety, and
defense) several times, and invite her to repeat back what she heard.
Anxiety in the smooth muscles or cognitive/perceptual disruption drops
slowly because the body needs time to metabolize the neurohormones that
were just released (Franchini and Cowley 2004).
Assessing the Pathway of Unconscious Anxiety Discharge
We must assess each patient response to intervention to find out where
his anxiety is discharged in the body. If anxiety is discharged in the striated
muscles, explore feelings and help the patient see and turn against his
defenses. However, as feeling and anxiety rise, the anxiety may shift into
the smooth muscles or cognitive/perceptual disruption. At this point, we
must shift to regulating the anxiety until it returns to the striated muscles.
Then we will use the graded format. The following examples illustrate how
to assess the pathways of unconscious anxiety discharge and how to
recognize signs that you must use the graded format.
Vignette One: A Fragile Patient
Fragile patients suffer from anxiety in the form of cognitive/perceptual
disruption and from regressive defenses. This example shows how to
recognize signs of fragility so that you can work within the patient’s
capacity without triggering regressions. A middle-aged man slowly walks
into the room without maintaining eye gaze, falls into the chair, and looks
limp. [No signs of striated muscle tension.]
Th: What’s the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: [Pauses.] Well, the first thing I should tell you … [Pauses.] I first
entered psychoanalysis when I was thirteen years old. [Patient
doesn’t answer the question. This is a defense against emotional
closeness—not revealing his need to the therapist. However, it may
also indicate a problem in thinking.]
Th: I would like to hear more about your history later. [Block the
defense and then invite him to engage in the therapeutic task.] But
first, in order to be helpful to you, what’s the problem you would
like me to help you with?
Pt: I have problems with anxiety.
Th: Are you aware of feeling anxious right now? [Immediately assess.]
Pt: Yes. [Ability to observe his anxiety.]
Th: Where do you notice feeling anxious in your body? [Assess the
biophysiological discharge pattern.]
Pt: All over. [Vague generalization.]
Th: But specifically where in your body?
Pt: I’m often sick in my stomach. [Smooth muscles. He moves out of the
present moment, a defense that prevents anxiety regulation now.]
Th: Are you feeling sick in your stomach now? [Block the defense of
moving out of the present moment. Assess his anxiety in this
moment.]
Pt: Yes, I threw up before the session. [Smooth muscles. Anxiety
regulation is imperative. He moves out of the present moment,
which shows he is unable to pay attention to his anxiety now.]
Th: Are you feeling like throwing up now? [Draw attention to this
moment.]
Pt: Yes, but not as much.
Th: You are feeling intense anxiety here today.
Pt: Not just today. I’ve been feeling this way for a couple of weeks.
[Since he called the therapist.]
Th: You are feeling anxious here with me today, and you have been
feeling intense anxiety ever since you made the call to my office.
Pt: Yes.
Th: We see that you have a problem with anxiety, and it is coming up
here with me. Can we take a careful look at this anxiety in your
body to help you with it? [Invite him to observe and pay attention
to his anxiety, to help regulate it and develop a therapeutic
alliance.]
Pt: Yes. [Tears up.]
Th: You mention feeling anxious in your stomach. Where else do you
notice feeling anxiety in your body?
Pt: I have a migraine right now. [Smooth muscles.]
Th: That’s another sign of anxiety. What’s another sign of anxiety that
you notice in your body?
Pt: What did you say? [Problem with hearing. Possible sign of
cognitive/perceptual disruption.]
Th: I was wondering where else you notice this anxiety. Are you having
some trouble with your hearing right now?
Pt: I don’t think so.
Th: Is there any ringing in your ears?
Pt: Yes. [Cognitive/perceptual disruption.]
Th: That’s another sign of anxiety. How is your vision? Is it clear or
blurry?
Pt: I can see you, but it’s a little blurry. [Cognitive/perceptual
disruption.]
Th: That’s another sign of anxiety. How is your thinking right now? Is it
clear, or are you having trouble forming your thoughts?
Pt: I think it is clear, but people do tell me that I seem slow. [His speech
and thinking are slowed, although he doesn’t notice.
Cognitive/perceptual disruption.]
Th: We see that you are very anxious. You have anxiety in your
stomach, blurred vision, ringing ears, and difficulty forming your
thoughts. All this is anxiety, and it has to do with coming here to
see me today. So there must be a lot of feeling underneath that is
triggering all this anxiety. [Direct his attention to the feeling
triggering his anxiety.]
Pt: Yes. [Wave of tears.]
Th: I notice as these tears come up, there’s another wave of anxiety. Do
you notice that?
Pt: Yes. I’m afraid of what you want. [Defense: projection—another
sign of fragility. He wants to tell the therapist about his feelings,
but through projection he assumes the therapist wants that.
Deactivate his projection of will. Otherwise, he will ward off a
“persecutory” therapist who “wants” something from him: a
misalliance.]
Th: Let’s clarify something. Who called me for this meeting? [Remind
him of his desire for therapy, which he has “located” in the
therapist. This deactivates his projection.]
Pt: I did.
Th: And who thought he had a problem?
Pt: Me.
Th: And who asked me to help him with this problem?
Pt: Me.
Th: So who wants something out of this?
Pt: Me, but I’m wondering what you want. [Projection still in place.]
Th: But who wants something out of this?
Pt: Me.
Th: Right. Let me offer you something to think about. You are the one
who wants something out of this. Right?
Pt: Yeah.
Th: And you are the one who wants to reveal something about himself
to this therapist. Right?
Pt: Right.
Th: I wonder if you find it scary how much you want to reveal yourself
here. [Establish an internal focus. His anxiety is triggered by a
feeling and desire inside him, not in the therapist.]
Pt: That’s true because I’ve been hurt before. [He projects onto the
therapist an image of someone who hurt him in the past. He cannot
differentiate the therapist from this projection.]
Th: As you and I sit here together, it’s like there’s an image of someone
in the past that comes between you and me. And then when this
image comes between you and me, you can lose touch with me and
feel more in touch with this image instead? [Address his
projection.]
Pt: Yes. [Relaxes in his chair. Fear of the projection on the therapist
evoked further anxiety. The drop in his anxiety signals that together
the patient and therapist have cleared up the projection.]
The patient’s anxiety is discharged into the smooth muscles and
cognitive/perceptual disruption. He observes it but cannot pay attention to
or regulate it.
Once the patient lets go of his projection, remind him of his will to do
therapy. Once he declares his desire to do therapy, ask him again what the
problem is for which he wants help. With each new phase (e.g., revealing
his problem, giving a specific example, declaring and experiencing his
feeling in that situation), the fragile patient’s anxiety will rise again, perhaps
going into cognitive/perceptual disruption. Monitor and regulate his anxiety
each time it exceeds his threshold for anxiety tolerance. If you intervene
and regulate his anxiety as soon as it goes into the smooth muscles, you can
often prevent it from going into cognitive/perceptual disruption. In this way,
you build his capacities for feeling and anxiety tolerance.
Labeling each bodily symptom helps the patient observe his anxiety and
what triggers it. These small-scale explanations orient the patient, make
sense of his symptoms, lower his anxiety, and help him learn to selfregulate. Now he can see how feelings trigger anxiety in a predictable
pattern. His bodily symptoms of anxiety become understandable reactions,
which he can observe and regulate. Identifying and regulating anxiety is
essential to co-create a therapeutic alliance with a fragile patient.
“Attack of the Adrenals”
When anxiety goes over the threshold of anxiety tolerance, one might
imagine a loudspeaker announcement inside the brain: “Attention all
parasympathetic forces. Urgent. Adrenal gland missile silos mounted atop
kidneys have just released chemical cortisol weapons of brain destruction.
Mobilize all internal defenses. Launch immediate counter-calm hormones
before hippocampus is hammered by cortisol” (Franklin Institute 2004).
The continued discharge of norepinephrine by the adrenal gland sustains
anxiety symptoms (Goldstein 2006; Rosen and Schulkin 2004, 176),
making the patient hyperexcitable. The adrenaline impairs his short-term
memory for several hours, so he cannot remember what you say in therapy
(Joels and Karst 2010; Southwick et al. 2005). Once neuroendocrine
discharge takes the prefrontal cortex “off-line,” the patient acts
inappropriately, is easily distractible, inattentive, disorganized, impulsive,
and hyperactive (Arnsten 1998b; Porges and Bazhenova 2006, 4). His
reasoning is less able to influence his behavior and thought.
Patients with depression, anxiety disorders, personality disorders, and
autism suffer from disturbed autonomic nervous system functioning
(Beauchaine 2001; Porges 2011; Prins, Kaloupek, and Keane 1995). High
levels of neuroendocrine discharge make the brain malfunction, leading to
problems of inattention, distractibility, impulsivity, intrusive aversive
memories, and other symptoms of cognitive/perceptual disruption. Defenses
emerge automatically, while the ability to reflect on them disappears.
Vignette Two: Going over the Threshold of Anxiety Tolerance
In this example, we show how to recognize when the patient’s anxiety
shifts over the threshold of anxiety tolerance, how to regulate the anxiety,
and how to help the patient see causality in the moment. Earlier in the
session the patient mentioned she suffers from irritable bowel syndrome.
Th: You mentioned a family problem. Would you like to take a look at
that?
Pt: I’ve got a conflict with my son. He’s been mentally ill for some
years, and he’s an alcoholic. This wouldn’t be such a problem
except that he’s living with me, and I told him he would have to
leave if he kept drinking. He told me he stopped drinking, but then I
keep finding empty bottles in the cabinets. [She describes what her
son does, not how this poses an emotional problem for her.]
Th: How is that a problem for you?
Pt: I just don’t know what to do about it. My friends say I should kick
him out, but then I don’t know where he would go. [Clear
statement of the problem. She realizes her friends have freer access
to their anger (“kick him out”), but anger makes her anxious.
Rather than feel angry toward her son, she worries and ruminates
(“I don’t know where he would go”). Worrying is a defense because
it keeps her stuck, unable to channel her feelings into effective
action.]
Th: There’s obviously some feeling you have toward your son, but then
you seem paralyzed [defense], as if you don’t know what to do with
your feelings.
Pt: That’s true. I don’t know what to do.
Th: Would you like to take a look at these feelings regarding your son
so we could help you get unstuck? [Mobilize her will to the
therapeutic task.]
Pt: [Sighs.] Yes. [Access to striated muscles. Clear wish to collaborate
on the therapeutic task.]
Th: What’s the feeling toward your son who lied to you about his
drinking?
Pt: [Sighs. Clenched hands—striated muscles.] I just feel he should
have told me the truth. [Defense: intellectualization.]
Th: That says what you think [describe defense], but it doesn’t tell us
what you feel toward him. What is the feeling toward him?
[Separate the feeling from the defense, and then invite her to face
her feeling.]
Pt: Upset. [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: Clearly he upset you, but what’s the emotion toward him for lying
to you?
Pt: My stomach is starting to cramp. [Smooth muscles. Her threshold
for anxiety tolerance has just been crossed. Point out the triangle of
conflict to bring her anxiety down.]
Th: As soon as we touch on these feelings toward your son, do you
notice how this anxiety comes in to attack you, as if it’s against the
law for you to have feelings toward him? [Point out the function of
the anxiety: to attack and punish her for her anger. Differentiate
her from the anxiety.]
Pt: I hadn’t thought of it that way before. Do you think these cramps are
related to my anxiety?
Th: What’s the sequence we saw here? Feelings toward your son, then
stomach cramps. [Draw her attention to causality: anger triggers
anxiety and defenses (intellectualization and turning on the self).]
Pt: That’s true.
In this example, the patient is able to tolerate a rise of her feelings
briefly until her anxiety shifts out of the striated muscles into the smooth
muscles. The therapist immediately begins to regulate the anxiety by
pointing out the anxiety and the causal sequence: feelings trigger anxiety
and symptoms.
When the patient’s anxiety goes into the striated muscles, focus on the
defenses to access the warded-off feeling. Interrupt each defense, one by
one, as they arise. Often, highly resistant patients exhibit nonverbal
defenses such as sitting in a slouched, uninvolved manner, and speaking
with a detached voice and expressionless face without anxiety. These
nonverbal behaviors should be addressed as defenses, not regarded as signs
of cognitive/perceptual disruption.
In contrast, the fragile patient’s anxiety is discharged into
cognitive/perceptual disruption. When his repressive defenses fail, he
becomes flooded with anxiety and projects his feelings onto the therapist.
Then he becomes hypervigilant about the therapist’s feelings rather than
observant of his own.
Mobilizing Self-Observing Capacity in the Anxious Patient
Interestingly, many patients with high anxiety do not see it. As children,
they learned to ignore their anxiety if it made their parents anxious (H. S.
Sullivan 1953b). Ignoring feelings and anxiety was adaptive in the past but
is maladaptive today. Ignoring anxiety ensures that it remains unregulated.
Help the patient observe and regulate her anxiety so therapy can become
useful. Focus on what the patient says and what her body does to provide
moment-to-moment anxiety regulation. This regulation of her body is the
precondition for a therapeutic alliance (Schore 2002) and any successful
therapy.
In the following material, we distinguish observation from attention. A
patient may not be able to observe that she is anxious. Another patient can
observe her anxiety for a moment but not pay attention to it. Thus, she will
not be able to regulate her anxiety. A third patient can observe and pay
attention to her anxiety over an extended period of time so she can regulate
it. Thus, first help the patient observe her anxiety. Then help her let go of
defenses that distract her from paying attention to her anxiety. Then she can
regulate it.
Defenses That Interfere with Anxiety Regulation
Helping patients observe and pay attention to their anxiety teaches them
healthy self-regulation. When patients habitually ignore their anxiety (Ten
Have de Labije 2006), it remains unregulated. Interrupt any defenses that
prevent anxiety regulation in the moment. Always return the patient’s
attention to her bodily experience in the moment. Anxiety cannot be
regulated in the past or the future, only now.
Vignette One: Ignoring—A Defense That Prevents Anxiety Regulation
This vignette shows how to interrupt defenses that prevent anxiety
regulation and how to help the patient develop a capacity for compassionate
attention to her anxiety—a precondition for co-creating any relationship for
change.
Th: You appear anxious. Are you aware of feeling anxious?
Pt: No. [No observing ability.]
Th: Do you notice your foot tapping?
Pt: Yes.
Th: That’s a sign of anxiety. Do you notice the tension in your
shoulders?
Pt: Yes, but they’re always like that. [The patient observes a symptom of
anxiety but ignores it and explains it away.]
Th: You see this tension in your shoulders. It’s there all the time you
say, but you say that as if you consider that normal. [The patient
talks as if it is normal to ignore her anxiety. Address the syntonicity
of her defense. If she thinks ignoring her anxiety helps her, she will
see no reason to address it.]
Pt: I don’t know if it’s normal, but I’m like this all the time.
Th: You see this isn’t normal to be so anxious. It’s just that you are
anxious most of the time.
Pt: Right, but there’s some other things I wanted to talk about. [She
ignores her anxiety now by talking about something else, but then
she can neither regulate her anxiety nor access her feelings.]
Th: Do you notice that you want to talk about something other than your
anxiety right now? [Draw attention to the defense of ignoring.]
Pt: Yes, because I have other things I want to talk about. [She knows she
wants to talk about something else, but she does not see its
defensive function or harmful effect.]
Th: But if we talk about something else, we will ignore your anxiety.
[Clarify the defense of ignoring her anxiety.] But if I ignored your
anxiety, what kind of therapist would I be? [Point out the cruel
relationship she invites.]
Pt: Not a very good one.
Th: Exactly. When you ignore your anxiety this way and try to talk
away from it, is this a helpful or harmful way to treat yourself?
[Help her differentiate therapeutic from nontherapeutic activity.]
Pt: It’s not helpful, but it’s what I do. [She can see it is not helpful, but
she has not differentiated from her defense. She is identified with
it.]
Th: Is that what you want to keep doing—ignoring your anxiety?
[Encourage her to turn against her defense.]
Pt: No. It’s just that I generally don’t pay attention to it. [She sees the
defense now.]
Th: That’s important for us to notice. You’ve come here to get help with
your anxiety, but to get help with it, both of us have to pay attention
to it, see what’s triggering it, and focus on that. If you ignore your
anxiety, we won’t be able to get to the bottom of your difficulties.
[Point out the task to the patient.]
Vignette Two: Avoiding the Present Moment Prevents Anxiety
Regulation
Regulating anxiety in the moment requires attention to experience in
this moment. This vignette shows how to help the patient develop a
capacity for moment-to-moment attention to her anxiety and inner life. This
moment-to-moment focus on “now” reveals the intersection between this
model of therapy and mindfulness.
Th: I notice you are anxious. Do you notice that?
Pt: Yes, I’m afraid of what we are going to get into here, and I’m afraid
I’ll feel worse. [The patient ignores her anxiety now and focuses on
a fantasy in the future instead. Ignoring her anxiety prevents her
from regulating it.]
Th: If we leave the future out of the picture for the moment [block her
defense of going off to the future, which will put her in a state of
hyperarousal], how do you experience this anxiety right now in
your body? [Mobilize attention to her anxiety in this moment.]
Pt: I just feel really tense, but I don’t see what good this will do. I
remember in my past therapy one time— [The patient focuses on a
past event, preventing anxiety regulation now. By doing so, she
treats other events as more important than her suffering in this
moment: self-devaluation.]
Th: We can get to that later [block her defense of moving out of the
present moment], but right now, how do you experience this anxiety
in your body?
Pt: Just really tense, like I said.
Th: We see you are feeling really tense right now here with me. Then
we see that you are tempted to ignore your anxiety in this moment
by going off to the future or the past. [Point out her defenses.] Do
you see how you do that?
Pt: But those are important. [She sees she ignores the present moment
but not how that prevents anxiety regulation.]
Th: Those other moments are important, and we’ll get to them later, but
right now you are anxious with me. If we go off to some other
moment, we will be ignoring your anxiety in this moment. If we
ignore your anxiety, will that help you or hurt you? [Differentiate
therapeutic from nontherapeutic behavior.]
Pt: Not helpful.
Th: If we don’t go off to the past or the future, can we keep our focus on
how you experience this anxiety right now in your body? [Orient
her to the task: paying attention to her internal experience at this
moment.]
Principle: To regulate anxiety, continually bring the patient back to the
current moment. Fantasies of future dangers or memories of
past traumas trigger increasing anxiety, preventing anxiety
regulation. Focus on experience in this moment to calm the
patient. Once you regulate her anxiety, explore her feelings
again.
Interventions to Mobilize Self-Observing Capacity
To regulate the patient’s anxiety you must mobilize her ability to
observe and pay attention to it. Then help her see the triangle of conflict and
causality: feelings trigger her anxiety. Anxiety triggers her defenses. And
defenses create her presenting problems. These are the self-observing
capacities we must help the patient develop.
Principle: If the patient is not aware of her anxiety, help her see and pay
attention to it so it can become regulated before exploring
feelings further.
Intervene as follows:
1. Inquire into the presenting problem and feeling until the patient’s
anxiety goes over the threshold of anxiety tolerance into the smooth
muscles or cognitive/perceptual disruption. Point out her anxiety:
“Are you aware of feeling anxious right now?”
2. Help the patient observe and pay attention to her anxiety. Ask if she
is aware of her anxiety. Inquiry into feeling while anxiety is
unregulated will trigger worsened anxiety and regressive defenses.
“Can we pay attention to your anxiety and see if we can help you
bring it down?”
3. If she is not aware of her anxiety, point out the symptoms of anxiety
in her body until she recognizes them. “The stomachache is a sign of
anxiety.” If she is aware of her anxiety but ignores it, address her
defenses. “If you shift topics now, we will ignore your anxiety. Do
you notice how you ignore your anxiety?” “Do you notice how you
talk over your anxiety?” Once she turns against these defenses, she
will learn to pay attention to and regulate her anxiety.
4. Once she observes and pays attention to her anxiety and her
defenses against doing so, ask, “Would you like to take a look at the
feeling underneath that is triggering your anxiety?”
5. When you ask the anxious patient about her feelings, she will almost
always confuse her feeling with anxiety. Help her differentiate her
feeling from anxiety. “That tension is your anxiety. How do you
experience the sadness underneath that makes you so anxious?”
6. When the patient sees her feeling, point out the triangle of conflict:
“This sadness [feeling] makes you anxious [anxiety], so you cover
the sadness by explaining it away [defense].”
Principles for Anxiety Regulation
To regulate the patient’s anxiety, differentiate her feeling from anxiety
and from defense in the moment. To do so,
1. Emphasize the present moment: A feeling triggers anxiety now, not
thoughts about the past or events in the future. Punitive thoughts
may perpetuate anxiety, but an unconscious feeling triggers it. So
find out what feeling triggers the patient’s anxiety now. In an earlier
example, a patient thought her test in three weeks caused her
anxiety. In fact, her sadness triggered her anxiety. Ruminating about
the test was a defense.
Principle: Feelings in the present moment cause unconscious anxiety,
not thoughts about the past or future.
2. Notice patterns of unconscious anxiety: An unconscious feeling
makes unconscious anxiety in the body rise. A defense makes
anxiety fall. For instance, if a patient feels grief over the loss of a
boyfriend who died but wards it off by devaluing him and voicing
her anger, her anxiety will drop. However, when approaching her
grief, unconscious anxiety will rise in her body.
Principle: Unconscious feelings trigger unconscious anxiety in the body.
Defenses do not.
3. Notice patterns of defense: The feeling occurs first, then anxiety,
and then a defense. A patient feels grief, her anxiety rises, and a
moment later she distracts herself with a defense. Then her tension
drops. When the patient faces a feeling, her anxiety will rise. When
she uses a repressive defense, her anxiety will drop.
Principle: Defenses occur after a rise of feelings and anxiety.
4. Pay attention to the process:
a. The therapist intervenes.
b. The feeling rises immediately.
c. Anxiety rises in a split second.
d. A defense occurs in the next split second.
This sequence occurs repeatedly in every session. If not, the patient and
therapist are not exploring feelings.
Principle: Unconscious feelings trigger anxiety followed by a defense.
5. Help the patient see causality: When the patient has a feeling, ask,
“What triggered this feeling?” When the patient’s anxiety rises, ask,
“What are you feeling now that is triggering this anxiety?” When
the patient experiences a symptom, draw her attention to the defense
she just used, which is creating the symptom. “Do you notice how
you became depressed just now after you turned the anger toward
your teacher back onto yourself ?”
Principle: Draw the patient’s attention to the stimulus triggering her
feeling, the feeling triggering her anxiety in the body, and the
defenses, which create her symptoms in the session. By seeing
causality, she sees what causes her suffering at the moment
she suffers.
Psychodiagnosis of Anxiety: When No Signaling Occurs
Sometimes, no signaling of unconscious anxiety in the striated muscles
results because the therapist is not focusing on the patient’s feelings.
However, if the therapist is focusing on the patient’s feelings, the lack of
unconscious signaling of anxiety can occur for other reasons (Abbass 2004;
Abbass, Lovas, and Purdy 2008):
Involuntary referral: The patient does not want to do therapy or
share his feelings, so no feeling rises to trigger anxiety. Solution:
Accept the patient’s lack of desire. Point out that you have no right
to do therapy with someone who does not want it. Leave the door
open for him to return later when he is in a different stage of the
change process (Miller and Rollnick 2002; Prochaska and Norcross
2007).
Ambivalence: The patient has one foot in and one foot out. She does
not want to be involved, so no feelings or anxiety will rise. Solution:
Explore her ambivalence.
• If she does not see how her defenses hurt her, she will not see
how therapy could help her. Clarify causality to reach a consensus
on what causes her presenting problems.
• If she says she is doing therapy to obey someone else, this is a
projection. Block this projection and clarify what is an internal
problem for her until you reach a consensus on a problem she
wants to work on.
• If she projects her will onto the therapist, deactivate that
projection until she owns her desire for therapy.
• If she understands the task but does not believe she can do it, help
her see the defense of underestimating herself.
No need for therapy: The patient may have come to the wrong office
while seeking a different professional. Solution: Refer the patient to
the correct treatment or nontreatment. For example, a patient was
referred to me for short-term therapy, but we learned he had suffered
a severe head injury in a recent automobile accident. He did not need
psychotherapy, but he did need physical therapy, neurofeedback, and
psychoeducation about recovery from brain trauma.
Organic or brain factors: The patient may experience genuine
confusion about the therapeutic process due to brain injury, belowaverage intelligence, or physical illness and exhaustion. Solution:
Explain the therapeutic task clearly and simply for patients with
below-average intelligence to get a conscious therapeutic alliance.
Do supportive psychotherapy while physically ill patients recover
the strength to do an exploratory therapy.
Discharge of anxiety into the smooth muscles or cognitive/perceptual
disruption: The patient may look superficially calm because her
anxiety is discharged into the smooth muscles and
cognitive/perceptual disruption instead of tension. Solution:
Regulate the patient’s anxiety until it returns to the striated muscles.
Discharge of anxiety through subtle tensing or hiding the tension
consciously: The patient can get rid of his anxiety by chewing gum
so it does not show up elsewhere in the body. Solution: Ask the
patient to take out the gum. Anxiety will appear in the body instead,
becoming more obvious to the patient and more visible to the
therapist. A patient who consciously hides anxiety will look stiff. His
face will seem like a mask, lacking spontaneous expression. He
immobilizes his body to avoid experiencing feelings in it.
Hiding of unconscious transference feelings through defenses: These
defenses include defiance, compliance, externalization, passivity,
hopelessness, helplessness, high degrees of intellectualization,
syntonic defenses, denial, and projection or projective identification.
(See chapters 4, 9, and 12.) Rather than experience her anger, the
patient can hide it under defenses. Unaware of her anger, she feels
no anxiety. Solution: Help the patient see her defenses and turn
against them. Feelings will rise, triggering anxiety in the body.
Repression of feelings: The defense of turning anger on the self
(repressing anger) makes the signaling of striated muscles drop.
Someone who turns anger on himself will be depressed, perhaps
revealing this defense of self-attack through his suicidal plans. In
such a case, the defense of self-attack will prevent anxiety from
rising. Solution: Help the patient see and turn against the defense.
Feelings and anxiety will rise.
Errors in technique: No unconscious anxiety will rise if the therapist
does not focus on feelings consistently enough, focuses on defenses
or on feelings that are not present, or challenges the defenses before
the patient has differentiated himself from them. In this last instance,
the patient will feel attacked. This misalliance will trigger conscious
anger but not unconscious anxiety.
Activation of the transference resistance: If a patient develops an
oppositional transference resistance and the therapist argues with
her, this interactional defense will repress feelings, and the patient
will feel no anxiety. If the patient adopts a passive, helpless stance
and the therapist acts out the active role of the “helper,” the patient
will feel no anxiety. When the therapist enacts the transference
resistance, no unconscious anxiety will rise. Solution: Deactivate the
transference resistance.
Overmedication: Patients on many medications or illegal substances
appear emotionally flat. These patients show no tension, fidgeting,
or shifting in the chair. If a patient appears emotionally flat, ask if he
is taking any psychotropic or pain medications. Solution: Consult
with the psychiatrist to reduce the patient’s medications. This
sometimes helps the patient become aware of his anxiety and
feelings.
Psychodiagnosis of Anxiety: Common Mistakes
Therapists unable to assess the discharge of anxiety in the body can
make mistakes in assessment:
When a patient exhibits some striated muscle tension, therapists
sometimes fail to assess all the anxiety pathways. In fact, some
patients will experience anxiety in both striated and smooth muscles
or in all three pathways. Careful assessment of anxiety will help the
therapist work within the patient’s threshold of anxiety tolerance
rather than go over it.
When working with a patient who appears limp and calm, therapists
sometimes assume the patient has no anxiety. As a result, they miss
symptoms of smooth muscle discharge or cognitive/perceptual
disruption, which are not visible.
When working with a patient who appears limp and calm, therapists
sometimes assume the patient has smooth muscle discharge or
cognitive/perceptual disruption. If the therapist avoids focusing on
unconscious feelings or relinquishing defenses, no unconscious
anxiety will rise.
When a patient is able to observe her anxiety, some therapists rush
ahead without assessing whether the patient can pay attention to and
regulate her anxiety. A patient may observe her anxiety but then
ignore it, preventing anxiety regulation. Until the patient lets go of
the defense of ignoring her feelings and anxiety, inviting feelings
will fail. A patient cannot face and experience her feelings if she
ignores her feelings and anxiety.
Some therapists pursue feelings when anxiety goes into the smooth
muscles or cognitive/perceptual disruption. This results in
stomachaches, headaches, increasing depression, dissociation, and
projection. Now the patient suffers from excessive anxiety. The
therapeutic goal is not to face one’s feelings while paralyzed with
anxiety but to experience one’s feelings deeply while anxiety goes
into the striated muscles.
Some therapists mistake a freeze/immobilization response for striated
muscle activation. A patient with this response has a hypervigilant or vacant
stare, barely noticeable breathing in the upper chest, racing thoughts, or
brain “fog” (Levine and Frederick 1997; P. Ogden, Minton, and Pain 2006;
Scaer 2001, 2005). Do not assume the patient’s anxiety is going into the
striated muscles unless you observe clenched hands, abdominal breathing,
and sighing.
When therapists avoid arousing anxiety by avoiding feelings and
defenses, the patient will not gain the capacity to face and bear them, and
her suffering will continue. When therapists explore rage based on a
projection, a misalliance develops. Clear up the projection first. Then
explore feelings.
The patient’s trembling is often misinterpreted as a discharge of the
patient’s rage rather than as a sign of excessive anxiety requiring immediate
regulation. Some therapists mistake fainting due to hyperventilation with
fainting due to the parasympathetic discharge of anxiety. When patients
hyperventilate, the blood becomes alkaline, leading blood vessels to
constrict, which causes lightheadedness and sometimes fainting. Do not
have the patient breathe into a paper bag. Instead, simply slow the patient’s
breathing by having her inhale for five seconds and exhale for five seconds
over the course of a minute or two. Or invite her to hold her breath for
fifteen seconds. The patient’s carbon dioxide levels will return to normal,
vasoconstriction will end, and dizziness will disappear. Then summarize the
process for the patient to show causality and regulate the anxiety. Help her
see that her feelings triggered anxiety, which triggered her symptoms.
Fainting due to the parasympathetic discharge of anxiety occurs after
symptoms of nausea, jelly legs, and lightheadedness. With smooth muscle
activation, blood vessels dilate, reducing blood pressure in the brain,
leading to cerebral hypoperfusion. Regulate the patient’s anxiety as soon as
you see any signs of nausea to prevent lightheadedness and fainting from
occurring at higher levels of anxiety. If faintness still occurs, summarize
what has happened, describe the triangle of conflict, and encourage the
patient to tense the muscles in her hands and arms (Gaynor and Egan 2011).
Or you can encourage the patient to stand up slowly and then descend into a
slightly squatting position with bent knees (Rothschild 2003). As she holds
this position for a minute, her sympathetic nervous system will activate,
balancing the parasympathetic activation. The symptoms of
cognitive/perceptual disruption will disappear. Then you can summarize the
process and begin to explore the patient’s feelings again.
Some patients can experience anxiety going into several pathways at the
same time. Traditionally, many believed the parasympathetic nervous
system had a “braking” effect on the sympathetic nervous system (Gellhorn
1967; P. Ogden et al. 2006; Scaer 2001, 2005). However, recent research
has shown this not to be true (Janig 2003, 142, 2007). Symptoms of anxiety
vary because the sympathetic and parasympathetic branches can activate
independently and antagonistically rather than in homeostatic balance
(Berntson, Cacioppo, and Quigley 1991, 1994). This helps explain the
spectrum of anxiety symptoms described by Abbass (2004, 2007) and
Folkow (2000).
When regulating the patient’s anxiety, first make sure the patient can see
his symptom of anxiety, pay attention to it, and label it as anxiety. Then help
the patient see causality: feelings trigger his anxiety. With these selfobserving capacities in place, anxiety should return to the striated muscles.
When it does not, we have to address defenses that prevent anxiety
regulation.
Before we go to the next section, let us take a look at figure 2.1, which
covers restructuring the pathway of unconscious anxiety discharge when it
goes into smooth muscles and cognitive/perceptual disruption.
Figure 2.1 Restructuring the pathway of unconscious anxiety discharge
when it goes into smooth muscles and cognitive/perceptual disruption
WHEN ANXIETY REGULATION DOES NOT WORK: THE
CAUSES VERSUS THE PERPETUATORS OF ANXIETY
When the patient’s anxiety goes into the smooth muscles or
cognitive/perceptual disruption we first regulate it. However, under certain
conditions anxiety regulation does not work. Then we must assess and
differentiate the causes of anxiety from the perpetuators of anxiety in the
patient.
Anxiety in the somatic and autonomic nervous systems is triggered by
Objective dangers (A. Freud 1936)
Unconscious cues (S. Freud 1926/1961d; A. Freud 1936), which are
paired through conditioning with ANS arousal (H. Davanloo,
supervision 2002–2004; LeDoux 1998, 2000, 2002; Panksepp and
Biven 1998; 2012; Schore 1994, 2003a, 2003b)
Anxiety, once triggered by a feeling, can be perpetuated by ego deficits
or regressive defenses. We must differentiate the causes of anxiety
(unconscious cues) from the perpetuators (regressive defenses and ego
deficits). When anxiety cannot be regulated, first identify and restructure
the defenses and ego deficits perpetuating the anxiety. Then you can
regulate the anxiety triggered by feelings.
Defenses That Perpetuate Anxiety
Some defenses do not repress but perpetuate the anxiety. Suppose a
patient feels anger toward his critical father.
Th: How do you experience this anger toward your father?
Pt: [Sighs.] I think I wasn’t a very good son to him. I was a stupid idiot.
[Identification with the critical father. Rather than be angry with his
critical father, he identifies with his father and criticizes himself.]
The defense represses the anger but at a price. The patient feels more
anxious, not realizing he attacks himself (see table 2.4).
Table 2.4 Anxiety triggered by a feeling versus anxiety perpetuated by a
defense
The anxiety in relation to these identifications has been called superego
anxiety (A. Freud 1936, 55). For instance, rather than face his anger toward
a critical father, a patient may identify with him and criticize himself. Thus,
he enacts an identification with his father. When self-criticism and selfattack become a habit, the patient feels anxious, as if someone else is
attacking him, but he does not see how he attacks himself. Anxiety
regulation does not work when the defense of self-attack perpetuates the
anxiety. Interrupt and point out self-attacking statements in a
compassionate, nonjudgmental way.
Pt: I feel like a failure.
Th: Wow! Did you just see what happened? [Interrupt the defense.]
Pt: No. What?
Th: Do you notice how there’s a critical mechanism in your mind that
comes in here and puts you down? When this critical system in
your mind comes up, does that get you down? Is it hurting you, do
you think?
Interrupt the patient’s self-attacks immediately. Once the patient can
observe and stop his self-attacks, his anxiety will drop.
This examination of causality allows us to understand the steps in
anxiety regulation. Cognitive therapy correctly points out a relationship
between rumination and anxiety (Beck et al 1979; Beck and Emery 1985).
However, it is not a causal relationship. In psychotherapy sessions,
unconscious feelings trigger anxiety. Defenses arise in response to feelings
and anxiety. Cognitive therapy addresses the defense of identification with
the aggressor (rumination, self-attack, catastro-phizing, etc.) that
perpetuates the preexisting anxiety.
Figure 2.2 Feedback loop to be broken for anxiety regulation
As shown in figure 2.2, the defense perpetuates the anxiety, creating a
feedback loop that activates the autonomic nervous system indefinitely
(McEwen and Lasley 2002).
Interrupt destructive cognitions resulting from identification with the
aggressor to stop the feedback loop. Then explore the feeling triggering the
patient’s anxiety. Build the patient’s capacity to bear the feeling. Then the
risk of relapse will drop.
Principle: When defenses perpetuate anxiety, help the patient see and let
go of these defenses first so anxiety regulation can become
possible.
When Anxiety Regulation Fails: Ego Deficits, Regressive
Defenses, and the Perpetuation of Anxiety
Focusing the patient’s attention on his bodily symptoms will usually
regulate anxiety caused by feelings. When it does not work, ego deficits,
character defenses, or regressive defenses perpetuate the anxiety, preventing
its regulation. In these cases, restructure that deficit or defense first. The
following section will show how to address the most common regressive
defenses and ego deficits that perpetuate anxiety.
Lack of Differentiation between the Observing Ego and the
Experiencing Self
Some lower functioning patients become flooded with anxiety because
they cannot distinguish themselves from their anxiety. They feel as if they
“are” their anxiety, not that their anxiety is a symptom they can observe in
the body. Help the patient differentiate himself from the anxiety he
experiences: “Let’s see if we can bring your head up above the anxiety
water, so together we can look down and see what’s going on down there.”
Motion with your hands, as if you are pushing the water down from above
your head to below your shoulders to illustrate for the patient how to get his
head above the anxiety (B. Winstanley, personal communication).
Use language that emphasizes observation to strengthen the patient’s
observing abilities: “Let’s step back for a moment and see if we can notice
and observe some bodily symptoms. If we take a moment to look, let’s see
where you notice symptoms of anxiety happening in your body.” “Let’s put
the anxiety out here for a moment [gesturing with your hand from your
chest out to the other side of the room] where we can take a look at it” (A.
Sheldon, personal communication). This visual metaphor helps the patient
observe his anxiety rather than be flooded by it.
Projective Anxiety
When the patient’s feelings make her anxious, she may project any
aspect of herself onto the therapist.
Projection of feeling: An angry patient says, “I think you are angry at
me.”
Projection of the superego: A patient who judges herself says, “I
think you are judging me.”
Projection of will: A patient who wants to understand herself
projects her wish onto the therapist and says, “I’m afraid of the
questions you want to ask me.”
The patient projects a part of herself onto the therapist and then fears the
therapist rather than this internal aspect of herself. The fear of a projection
is projective anxiety (H. Davanloo, supervision 2002– 2004). We cannot
regulate anxiety when projection perpetuates it. Deactivate the projection
before attempting anxiety regulation.
Projection of Feeling
An angry patient says, “I think you are angry at me.” When the patient
projects his anger onto you and believes you are angry, he will fear you.
This is projective anxiety. In this vignette, the therapist deactivates the
patient’s projective anxiety by helping him see the difference between the
therapist and the projection.
Th: What’s the evidence for that?
Pt: It’s just the way I feel. [“If I feel it, that makes it so.” Failure of
reality testing.]
Th: That’s the way you feel. So we need to ask, “What is the evidence?”
Pt: I just think you are.
Th: Given you think and feel that, we need to check out whether that is
really the case. I’m not aware of feeling angry, so I need to ask
what the evidence is that you see.
Pt: I don’t have any evidence. It’s just a feeling. [Progress in reality
testing.]
Th: It’s just a feeling. I’m not aware of feeling angry toward you, and
you mention you don’t have any evidence that I am angry with you.
Pt: So what is your point?
Th: My point is this: you were talking about being angry with me for
taking a vacation next month. Remember that?
Pt: Yes.
Th: As soon as you felt this anger toward me, you got anxious, and it’s
as if you asked me to hold your anger because it felt risky just to
feel it toward me.
Pt: [Relaxes in his chair: drop of projective anxiety.] Yes, I think it did
feel risky.
Th: Can we take a look at the anger toward me?
Projection of the Superego
A patient who judges herself says, “I think you are judging me.” When
the patient judges herself and projects this judgment onto you, she will fear
you as a judge. This is projective anxiety. We must help her differentiate the
therapist from a judge and then help her see her own internal judgment.
Then we will have helped her develop an internal perspective on her
problems.
Th: Do you notice how this punitive mechanism in your mind tries to
place the image of a judge onto me? [Differentiate the therapist
from the projection.]
Pt: I sense you are judging me.
Th: That’s not my intent. You were just judging yourself, and then you
put your internal judge onto me. [Point out the projection of her
superego.]
Pt: And so now you are saying that I’m really pathological and sicko?
[Projection]
Th: Wow! Do you see how cruel that punitive mechanism is to you right
now? [Point out the cruelty of the superego to help her turn against
it.]
Pt: [Tears in her eyes.]
Th: Do you see how the punitive mechanism takes my words of concern
and twists them into something to torture you with?
Pt: But you are saying I am pathological. [Projection.]
Th: No. I am saying this punitive mechanism is treating you in an
abusive manner, and I think it is very unfair to you. And I’m also
saying that this punitive mechanism tries to twist my words of
concern into something horrible, and then it abuses and accuses
you. Would you agree that this punitive mechanism is being unfair
to you right now? [Differentiate her from the punitive mechanism.]
Pt: [Relaxes. Drop in projective anxiety.] Yes.
When she projects her conscience, she fears the judgment of others.
Then she becomes blind to the ways she judges herself.
Projection of the Will
A patient who wants to understand himself projects his will onto the
therapist and says, “I’m just afraid of the questions you want to ask me.” To
deactivate the projection, remind the patient of his will and desire to engage
in therapy. When his anxiety drops, the projection has been deactivated. At
that point, ask the patient what he feels so he notices the difference when he
is connecting with his will rather than with his projection. Once the
projective anxiety drops, regulate the anxiety caused by feeling (if this is
necessary) or explore the underlying feeling. See the example on pp. 53–56.
Principle: When the patient cannot differentiate you from the projection,
deactivate the projection first before trying to regulate the
anxiety. If the patient views you as an ogre, you will not be
trusted to regulate the patient’s anxiety.
Symbolic Equation
The traumatized patient who equates a memory in the past with reality
today relives the past rather than remembers it, retraumatizing himself. This
problem is symbolic equation (Segal 1981). The patient equates a symbol
(memory or fantasy) with reality. The patient may equate a feeling today
with an experience in the past (reliving a memory, having a flashback) or
equate the therapist with a projection. The patient becomes afraid of the
therapist, unable to form a therapeutic alliance.
Vignette One: Equating a Memory of the Past with Reality in the
Present
When the patient equates the therapy with a traumatic experience in the
past, she loses contact with a helpful therapist and relives a trauma with a
harmful figure. Our task is not to have the patient relive the past, which is
traumatic, but to remember and work through the feelings of the past. To do
that, we must help the patient differentiate the present from the past. In this
vignette, the therapist has just asked the patient what the feeling is toward
her abusive mother. The patient hides her hands, freezes, and braces herself.
Th: You seem to be bracing yourself. What is happening inside?
Pt: I feel anxious.
Th: I see that. How do you experience this anxiety in your body?
Pt: I’m just afraid because when I feel a feeling about my mother, it
becomes real. [She loses the distinction between reality in the
present and a memory from the past.]
Th: No wonder you are afraid. Even though we know it is today, Friday,
in Washington, DC, once you have a feeling, your body can forget
which day it is, and your body feels as if it is years ago, even
though you and I know it is today. [Differentiate the past from the
present.]
Pt: [Relaxes.] Yes, that is it exactly.
Th: It’s important for us to remember that a feeling is just a memory.
And our task here is to help you remember the past but not to relive
it. Does that make sense? [Clarify the therapeutic task to deactivate
the projection. Sometimes the patient believes the therapist wants
her to relive the trauma in therapy. Deactivating that projection
brings down projective anxiety.]
Pt: That makes sense. [Relaxes more.]
Vignette Two: Equating an Image from the Past with the Therapist
When the patient equates the therapist with a figure in the past, the
patient can relive the past trauma and be overwhelmed with anxiety. To
prevent this retraumatization, the therapist must help the patient
differentiate him from the image from the past. A dissociative patient in his
third session describes his reactions to learning that he dissociates in
therapy. As he does so, his anxiety rises.
Th: What are you feeling right now?
Pt: Anxious.
Th: That’s what I thought. Where do you notice that anxiety in your
body right now?
Pt: In my chest and in my legs.
Th: What do you notice in your legs?
Pt: They’re jumpy. [The patient was experiencing an urge to run from
the room, a topic that had been touched on before.]
Th: They are jumpy. You have a connection with me in the present, and
then we see anxiety come up. And we know we have been talking
about how you and your wife can be even more connected, and
we’re trying to help you with anxiety because we saw last time that
there’s connection, anxiety, and then blip [dissociation] right?”
Pt: Yes.
Th: This is progress because you’re present with me, and you are
feeling anxiety without a blip.
Pt: Yes.
Th: That’s progress. Right now you’re feeling this anxiety as a
jumpiness in your legs?
Pt: Yeah.
Th: How do you experience the jumpiness in your legs?
Pt: It’s like a pressure in my legs. Yesterday I felt that same thing, and I
had to keep moving my legs. I kept—they didn’t feel comfortable
in any position I put them.
Th: When you say the legs feel jumpy. What are your legs wanting to
do?
Pt: Move.
Th: Are they wanting to jump? Are they wanting to run? If they just did
what they wanted to do, what would they do?
Pt: If they were doing like last time I was here, they’d want to jump and
then run.
Th: They’d want to jump. What do you notice feeling right now?
Pt: Tension.
Th: What do you notice feeling in your arms? Because you notice your
arms are like this. [Grabbing position.] What’s that? What are those
arms wanting to do?”
Pt: Not sure. They’re, they’re kind of locked into position.
Th: They’re locking into position. What are those arms wanting to do?
Pt: Well, the most comfortable position is like this. [Places arms to his
side at rest—defense.]
Th: Yes, but they were doing something else, weren’t they? There was
this jumpiness in the legs and the arms. What do you notice in those
arms?
Pt: They want to do something.
Th: What is that? What is it they want to do?
Pt: Protect myself. I felt comfortable protecting myself like this [crosses
arms across his chest], and I think I was saying to myself, I don’t
want to protect myself. I want to move forward, and if I protect
myself, I’m not going to be able to.
Th: But you know what? Your body is telling us at some point in your
life you had to protect yourself, or you couldn’t, right?
Pt: Mm-hmm.
Th: And it’s telling me that right now. I want us to listen to your body
because at some point you apparently had to not listen to it. I don’t
know when that was. Maybe you’ll figure that out, but right now
I’m seeing your body’s having this reaction, as we have this
connection because you know you’re sitting here with me, mildmannered therapist on Connecticut Avenue. But we’re seeing your
body is having a different experience. Your body’s not here with
me. Your body is with someone else. Your body is with somebody
where you’re feeling like you’ve got to jump and protect yourself
or jump and run. [Address time-space distortion. The present is not
the past (Rothschild 2003). Differentiate the real relationship from
the projection.]
Pt: Okay.
Th: So it’s sort of like we’re having a relationship in stereo.
Pt: Okay.
Th: We’ve got two tracks right now. We’ve got a good connection.
You’re wanting to connect with me, and I’m wanting to connect
with you in a psychotherapy relationship. And right now your body
is telling me you’re having a relationship with someone who’s
apparently dangerous, whom you want to protect yourself from or
run away from. [Distinguish the therapeutic alliance in the here
and now from a projection based on the past (Bateman and Fonagy
2004; Fonagy et al. 2002).]
Pt: Right.
Th: And that’s getting in the way because you’ve been talking about
how you and your wife have trouble making love. It’s hard if this
protecting and running and jumping urge is coming up in bed,
right?
Pt: That’s true.
Th: It’s impossible, right? We’re trying to help you with what your body
does. I want us to really listen because you’re here wanting to
connect with me, but your body is doing something different. And
we have to listen to what happens because in just connecting here
with me, you got jumpy. [His anxiety drops in his body.]
Pt: Okay.
Th: Then there’s this urge to jump and then the arms are wanting to
protect you. How are the arms wanting to protect you?
Pt: More like, more like this. [Crosses his arms in front of himself—
defense.]
Th: There’s this and then there’s this [the therapist imitates the two
defensive gestures], but I also saw your hands are doing this [the
therapist imitates the impulse gesture], and I want to pay attention.
What’s that? What are the arms wanting to do when they’re like
that [in the grabbing position]?
Pt: The thing that comes to mind that doesn’t make any sense is that I
want to put my hands around my father’s neck and choke the life
out of him. [Emergence of the murderous impulse toward his father
that evoked the unconscious anxiety. The patient holds his hands in
front of his face as if strangling his father.]
Th: Okay.
Pt: But that’s with my hands in this position.
Th: Do I have your permission for us to go there?
Pt: [Nods.]
In this example, the patient’s jumpy legs reveal his anxiety and his
projection: he mistakes the therapist for his violently abusive father. He is
not conscious of this projection, but his body reacts as if he is in danger
with the therapist. To reduce the risk of his acting impulsively, the therapist
invites the patient to pay attention to the urge to run, to notice, watch, and
describe that urge. Next the therapist helps him see the difference between
present and past, here and there, the therapist and someone else, the
therapeutic alliance and a past relationship. As those distinctions become
clear to the patient, his anxiety drops, and his body relaxes. Suddenly, a
murderous rage toward his father emerges.
Vignette Three: Equating Fantasy with Reality
Some patients, especially those with panic disorder, equate their
fantasies with reality. Their conflicts often involve rage, which triggers
anxiety, which becomes perpetuated because they lose sight of the
difference between their fantasies and reality.
In this vignette, a patient has called the therapist’s office crying
hysterically, saying that she is lost but on her way. She arrives to her session
twenty minutes late, hyperventilating, pouring out a story of how she got
lost on her way to the appointment. Her daughter has recently gotten into
legal trouble due to alcoholism, and the patient fears her daughter could
lose her job.
Pt: I’m just afraid she could die if she does not get into rehab. [Speech
races. Anxiety rises.] Do you mind if I call her right now to find out
if she is still alive? [Failure to distinguish fantasy from reality.]
Th: You are obviously anxious right now. Would you agree? [Interrupt
her defense of rumination to draw her attention to her anxiety.]
Pt: Yes, do you mind if I call?
Th: Before you do that, can we pay attention to this anxiety? You were
so anxious before you got here that you said your eyes were blurry.
Right?
Pt: Yes.
Th: That’s a serious sign of anxiety. Then you got lost, which means
your anxiety was so high, your mind wasn’t working right. Would
you agree?
Pt: Yes, I was terribly anxious.
Th: Let’s pay attention to this anxiety that has been so torturous to you
today. Where do you notice feeling tension in your body? [Mobilize
her attention to symptoms of anxiety in her body. Invite her to pay
attention to one symptom until the symptom decreases or
disappears. Then invite her to pay attention to another symptom.
Five minutes later she is calmer.] How is your vision now?
Pt: My vision is fine now.
Th: And how is your thinking?
Pt: Much better—it’s not racing so much.
Th: That’s another sign your anxiety has dropped. How is your
breathing?
Pt: It’s much better now. I was having trouble breathing, like I was
choking.
Th: But now, in this moment?
Pt: Now the breathing is fine.
Th: We see that your anxiety was extremely high, your vision was
blurry, your thinking was racing, your breathing was difficult, but
now your vision is fine, your thinking is fine, and your breathing is
easy. You are calm now. I assume you were not anxious when you
began driving here today.
Pt: No, I was fine. I was looking forward to seeing you today.
Th: I wonder what happened on the way to my office that triggered so
much anxiety?
Pt: Nothing. I talked to my husband, and he told me that my daughter
did not follow the judge’s instructions, so she could end up in jail.
Th: Even though the judge had told her, and you had told her.
Pt: Yes!
Th: What was your feeling toward your daughter for sabotaging herself
like that?
Pt: I was angry.
Th: You were angry with your daughter. The anger made you anxious,
and then you had a panic attack.
Pt: To punish myself.
Th: You were angry. You became anxious. Then you punished yourself
with a panic attack, punishing yourself with a horrible fantasy that
she would die.
Pt: But she could.
Th: That’s not the point. The point is you have punished yourself many
times for your anger by imagining her dead. [Help the client see
that real anger toward her daughter is triggering her imaginary
fantasies, which lead to panic attacks.]
Pt: I see. It’s a way to hurt myself.
Th: Right. If a friend of yours had a problem with her daughter, would
you torture her by whispering in her ear all day long, “Your
daughter could die!”
Pt: Of course not.
Th: Why not?
Pt: Because it would be cruel and not true.
Th: And the same is true if you do it to yourself.
Pt: I see. [Now she is much calmer because she can clearly distinguish
fantasy from reality and no longer punishes herself in the session.]
Regulate the patient’s anxiety so her mind can function effectively. Then
explore her feelings.
Vignette Four: Transient Delusion
In the face of rising feeling and anxiety, a fragile patient may suffer a
transient delusion, which will heighten her anxiety unless you rapidly
address it. In the following vignette, a patient suffered from panic attacks
and frequent problems in reality testing. The therapist explores her anxiety
after she becomes aware of feeling angry with her son.
Th: Where do you notice this anxiety in your belly? [Explore her
parasympathetic symptoms and mobilize her attention to her
anxiety.]
Pt: Right here, like acid in my stomach.
Th: Where else do you notice anxiety in your body?
Pt: [Becomes weepy and more anxious.] I feel like maybe I have my
babies in my belly. Pregnant.
The feeling of rage triggers anxiety and the defense of a delusion. In
effect, she is saying, “I am not the mother who feels rage toward my
children; I am the mother who wants only to give birth to them.” This
breakdown of the boundary between reality and fantasy triggers more
anxiety.
To increase the patient’s orientation to reality, draw her attention to
concrete facts that contradict the delusion. Then regulate her anxiety. Then
point out causality: “You felt rage toward your son, and it made you
anxious. So you tried to hide your rage toward your son by imagining that
you only want to be pregnant with him.”
Th: It’s like your babies are in your belly.
Pt: Uh-huh, and I am trying to keep them from being— [Rise in anxiety
and weepiness. She does not distinguish between reality and her
delusion.]
Th: As you look at your belly, are you pregnant? [Draw attention to
reality.]
Pt: [Looks at her belly.] No, but it feels that way. [Cries.]
Th: But are you pregnant, as you look there?
Pt: [Looks at her belly.] No. [Cries.]
Th: Are Jim and Jane [her children] in your belly right now?
Pt: But it reminds me of Jim. [Still does not differentiate reality from
fantasy.]
Th: But are Jim and Jane in your belly?
Pt: No, they are not. [Immediately calms down and takes off her coat.
With the clear differentiation between reality and delusion, her
anxiety drops quickly.]
Th: They’re not in your belly. What do you notice feeling in your belly
now?
Pt: [Sighs.] A little better there. [The return of sighing signals a drop in
her anxiety from the high levels of moments before.]
Th: Are you pregnant as you look there?
Pt: [Calmly.] No.
Th: Are Jim and Jane in your belly?
Pt: [Calmly] No. They are not here.
Th: Would you agree they are probably too big to be in your belly now?
Pt: [Laughs and smiles.] Yes. [Her children are adults. Now able to
differentiate reality from delusion, her anxiety drops further.]
Th: How is your belly now?
Pt: The pain is still there, but it is smaller.
Transient delusions and losses of reality testing occur when anxiety
goes into cognitive/perceptual disruption. Poor reality testing perpetuates
anxiety. First, address the reality testing problems, then regulate anxiety,
and then point out the causality of feeling, anxiety, and defense. Do not
explore the content of delusions when the patient’s anxiety is too high for
her prefrontal cortex to function properly. She cannot distinguish between
reality and fantasy, reflect on her delusion, think symbolically, or integrate
information. She cannot look at the raging river because she is drowning in
it.
The delusion’s content is not as important as its function: to ward off
feelings. Pay attention not to the delusion but to the person who is hidden
underneath.
Principle: To address reality testing problems, first try to regulate the
anxiety. If this does not help, then address the ego deficits or
projections, which perpetuate the anxiety.
Remind the patient of reality to deactivate a delusion: “As you look
at your belly, are you pregnant?”
Remind the patient of reality to deactivate a projection: “As you look
at my eyes now, do these look like eyes of judgment? What do you
see in these eyes?”
Remind the patient of contradictory realities to block splitting: “You
say you feel only angry with your husband and at the same time you
remember nursing him lovingly before he died.”
In response to these interventions, the patient may become dizzy.
Regulate her anxiety and then show her causality: “Something about
recognizing these complex feelings in you triggers some anxiety. You feel
both angry with your dead husband and at the same time remember nursing
him lovingly.” If the patient regresses, becomes paranoid, and projects more
violently, she is probably at a psychotic level of character structure and in
need of a supportive form of therapy (Kernberg 1975).
Principle: When unconscious feelings cause anxiety, regulate the anxiety,
and then help the patient face the feelings. By facing and
experiencing those feelings deeply, her anxiety and defenses
will decrease.
Following are some ways to address defenses or ego deficits, which
prevent anxiety regulation: Restructure the defenses or ego deficits that
perpetuate anxiety. Once projective anxiety or anxiety resulting from
defenses drops, then regulate anxiety resulting from feelings. The following
list summarizes how to do this:
Ego deficits: Regulate the anxiety, show causality, and then explore
feelings.
Self-attack: Help the patient differentiate herself from and turn
against this defense. Then explore the feelings she warded off by
using this defense.
Projection: Deactivate the projection and the resulting projective
anxiety. Regulate anxiety due to feelings. Then explore feelings.
Splitting: Draw the patient’s attention to contradictory realities,
building the capacity to bear these split-off feelings while anxiety is
regulated.
For a summary of the decision tree for anxiety regulation, see figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3 Decision tree for regulating anxiety
SUMMARY
Assess anxiety symptoms to find out the patient’s threshold for anxiety
tolerance. Once you regulate the patient’s anxiety, build up his capacities
for anxiety and feeling tolerance, so he can experience his feelings more
deeply. If you cannot regulate the anxiety, address the regressive defenses,
character defenses, or ego deficits that perpetuate it. Address them first to
make regulating anxiety possible.
The ability to regulate a patient’s anxiety depends in large part on how
well you, as a therapist, regulate your own. Personal psychotherapy is
essential for any practicing therapist: recognizing your anxiety will help you
be sensitive to the anxiety of others. To develop your anxiety regulation to
the highest levels, consider using a biofeedback device such as Healing
Rhythms (http://www.wilddivine.com). It will help you monitor your heart
rate variability and become better physiologically regulated. It will help you
become more aware of subtle fluctuations of anxiety in your body so you
can attune to yourself and your patients. Meditation and exercise are also
recommended. To regulate others, you must be able to regulate yourself. To
help others face their deepest feelings, you must be able to bear your own.
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Ten Have de Labije, J. (2006). When patients enter with anxiety in the
forefront. In The Collected Writings of Josette ten Have de Labije (pp.
37–80). Del Mar, CA: Unlocking Press.
RECOMMENDED MATERIALS
If you would like to study a videotaped session that shows how to assess
and regulate anxiety in a fragile patient, go to
http://www.istdpinstitute.com/DVD and you will find a DVD of an actual
session, a teaching DVD on fragility, and an analyzed transcript of the
session on the DVD.
If you would like to review the basic points of anxiety assessment and
regulation on videos by Jon Frederickson, you can visit the URLs below.
Anxiety assessment part 1 (May 24, 2012). http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=22yLR49VUeM.
Anxiety assessment part 2 (May 24, 2012). http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=FBZF-Ni4rNo.
Anxiety assessment part 3: Anxiety regulation (November 12, 2012).
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vo62ZMGl6ew.
W
CHAPTER THREE
Defenses: The Second Detour from Feelings
hen we explore feelings, patients use defenses, which cause their
presenting problems. Defenses automatically and unconsciously
ward off aspects of reality and feelings that trigger anxiety. Since
defenses prevent us from seeing reality accurately, we cannot respond
adaptively. As a result, we fail to achieve our goals, and we experience
increased negative feelings. In contrast, coping mechanisms are conscious
strategies we use flexibly to solve an external problem. They decrease
negative feelings, helping us function, so we can solve or manage our
problem (Cramer 1991, 1997, 1998, 2003, 2006).
Defenses alter the way we feel by altering the way we see or interpret
reality, but they do not change reality itself. For instance, an adolescent girl
uses denial when she has unprotected sex. She tries to change her internal
state of anxiety rather than face external reality: she could get pregnant.
Denial avoids her anxiety internally, but it creates a new problem externally.
Defenses distort our perception of reality, resulting in pathological
functioning (Haan 1977).
Defenses also ward off unacceptable thoughts, impulses, and wishes (S.
Freud 1894/1958). For example, if you ask a woman what she feels toward
her boyfriend for hitting her, she might answer, “I think it was an immature
thing he did.” She intellectualizes to ward off the anger she cannot accept.
Defenses also function interpersonally to prevent emotional intimacy
with others (Kernberg 1975; Kohut 1977, 1984; H. S. Sullivan 1953b;
Winnicott 1965). A woman asks her boyfriend if he loves her. He replies,
“Well, I’m not sure what you mean by the word love. I certainly have grown
accustomed to your face.” He intellectualizes to keep her and his feelings at
a distance. Defenses can also maintain self-esteem and ward off negative
feelings (Cooper 1998; Fenichel 1945; Kohut 1977). A medical student who
flunks out of school says, “It’s no big deal. I didn’t want to be a doctor
anyway.” He uses denial to avoid a loss of self-esteem.
THE INTERPERSONAL ORIGIN OF DEFENSES
We learn as children to ignore any elements of reality (stimulus, feeling,
anxiety, defenses, problems) that make our caretakers anxious so we can
preserve our bond with them (Benjamin 1993; Bowlby 1973, 1980; Main
1995; H. S. Sullivan 1953b). The physically abusive father looks at his son
and says, “Wipe that smile off your face, young man!” The boy hides his
feelings to preserve an insecure attachment (Benjamin 1993, 1995; Cooper
1998).
This child learns not affect regulation but affect dissociation through
ignoring his feelings like his father does. Avoiding feelings by using
defenses explains the link between attachment style and psychopathology
(Cassidy 1994; Dozier, Stovall, and Albus 1999; Main 1995; Sroufe 1989,
1996).
Having learned implicitly that feelings make a caretaker anxious, the
child automatically uses defenses when feelings rise. The unconscious
perception of threatening emotions triggers anxiety (see chapter 2) and
defenses (Cramer 2006, 2008). These defenses, learned in childhood,
become strengthened through countless repetitions (Grigsby and Stevens
2000), creating a rigid character structure by adulthood (Main 1995).
All of this occurs out of a person’s awareness. Unconscious or implicit
memory triggers defenses (Clyman 1992; Duffy 1997; Reber 1993), which
occur automatically and habitually without awareness or effort. Patients do
not use defenses consciously.
Imagine hopping on a bicycle to go for a ride. You would not
consciously shift your balance to begin pedaling. It would just happen
automatically. Bicycle riding is a set of motoric procedures never encoded
in language. You are not conscious of cues telling you to shift your body for
balance. This is unconscious procedural memory at work.
In fact, most of our everyday actions take place automatically through
procedural memory (Bargh and Chartrand 1999). It is the most efficient
way for the brain to work. Conscious awareness of a feeling is not
necessary to activate a defense. This automaticity allows children to
respond to emotions quickly and adaptively (Bradley 2000, 148). Defenses
and resistances reveal how we learned to “ride a relationship.”
Since nonconscious procedural memory triggers defenses from the
beginning of life, the patient never sees them. That is why he assumes a
defense is “how I am.” You can concentrate on a phone conversation
because you do not need to think about how to form words while you are
talking. Procedural memory runs automatically, precisely so your attention
is free for other tasks. You do not have to pay attention to the motoric
procedures for scratching an itch or using a defense. They happen
automatically.
Since defenses happen unconsciously, a patient cannot see them without
the therapist’s help. So first we help the patient observe and pay attention to
his defenses. A patient who uses the defense of self-attack a thousand times
a day will become depressed. If he doubts all of his decisions, he will
become confused. Defenses create and maintain presenting problems. That
is why it is an act of compassion to interrupt and identify the patient’s
defenses. They create symptoms.
But you may ask, “Isn’t there a danger if you take away the patient’s
defenses?” The good news is, you cannot. You can take the wallet out of my
pocket, but you cannot take away my ability to intellectualize. Defenses are
behaviors (Wallerstein 1985). Once we bring defenses to the patient’s
awareness, they become choices the patient makes. She can face or avoid
her feelings. We can point out how she avoids her feelings. We can point
out the price: avoiding feelings causes her presenting problems. She will
always have the choice to face her feelings or use a defense. No one can
ever take that choice away from her.
Others may ask, “Aren’t defenses essential for our functioning?”
Healthy, mature defenses are essential for healthy functioning (Vaillant
1993). Maladaptive defenses are not. They create presenting problems and
symptoms (Cramer 2006; Erickson, Feldman, and Steiner 1997; Gross and
Levenson 1997). Children use defenses to adapt to their environment
(Hartmann 1964). When generalized to other people, defenses become
maladaptive, creating problems. We must help patients let go of destructive
defenses, experience their feelings, and channel them into adaptive actions
rather than maladaptive defenses.
Others may ask, “But without a defense, how can the patient defend
herself ?” Without a defense, a child could not defend herself from a parent
disrupted by the child’s feeling. However, an adult who uses denial, for
instance, is unable to see reality clearly and respond to it. Thus, the defense
that helped the child harms the adult, causing presenting problems and
symptoms. We might say that the child’s defenses become the adult’s
attackers.
When the patient uses defenses to avoid her feelings, we cannot engage
in the therapeutic task. We must address them to co-create a healing,
therapeutic alliance.
Table 3.1 shows typical defenses patients use to refuse an invitation to
form a therapeutic alliance.
Table 3.1 Typical defenses
Intervention Defense
“What is the problem you would like me to
help you with?”
“I don’t have a problem.”
“Is there a specific example we could look at?” “I can’t think of one.”
“What is the feeling toward him?” “I don’t have a feeling.”
“Could we take a look at this?” “Anything else but this.”
“How do you experience this feeling physically
in your body?”
“I don’t.”
“Is this a problem you would like to
overcome?”
“No. This is not a problem
for me.”
Why does a patient respond in these ways? As a child, the patient used
defenses to adapt to his caretakers and their fears. Every defense enacts this
history (Gray 2005) of the need to adapt (Hartmann 1964). As an adult, the
patient tries to fit with a listener whom he misperceives as someone risky in
his past. For instance, the patient who criticizes herself perceives the
therapist as someone who would criticize her. Thus, every defense
originally had a self-affirming, positive effect. It reestablished a fit with
someone in the past. However, defenses, which originated as adaptive
regulators of relationships, become maladaptive perpetuators of the past.
DEFENSE WORK
Since defenses have always been unconscious as implicit, procedural
memory, the patient is not aware of them. Thus, we must help the patient
see them. Defense work has three stages: (1) identification; (2) clarification;
and (3) confrontation. First, identify the defense so the patient can observe
it. Second, clarify the defense by showing him its function and price. Once
the patient sees the defense’s function and price, make sure he recognizes
that he is not the same as his defense (“That’s just the way I am”). Then you
can confront the defense. Now let us go to the first stage of defense work.
Defense Identification
As soon as a defense occurs, help the patient identify it. Point out the
defense so he can see how he is avoiding feeling in the moment.
Remember: if the patient cannot see his defense, he cannot let go of it. The
following are examples of defense identification:
“That’s your thought, but your thought is not a feeling. Do you see
how you cover your feeling with a thought?” [Point out
intellectualization.]
“Do you notice how you doubt yourself ?” [Point out self-doubt.]
“Do you notice how you distance yourself from your feelings right
now?” [Point out distancing.]
“It is not clear what the internal emotional problem is you would like
me to help you with. Do you notice you are having trouble giving a
clear example of what you want help with?” [Point out vagueness.]
Sometimes, to point out a defense, we must help the patient differentiate
the defense from feelings. This is known as differentiating the corners of
the triangle of conflict.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for slapping you?
Pt: I feel shut down. [Patient does not differentiate the defense of
shutting down from her feeling.]
Th: Shut down is not your feeling. Shut down is how you deal with your
feeling. You shut it down. [Differentiate her feeling from her
defense.] If you don’t shut down your feeling, what is the feeling
toward him for slapping you?
A patient cannot turn against a defense she does not see. Anytime
therapy is stuck, assess what defenses she uses that prevent a therapeutic
alliance from forming.
Defense Clarification: The Price
The second step in defense work shows the patient the price and
function of the defense. Help the patient see the price of the defense: it
causes her symptoms and presenting problems. Always help the patient see
causality: feelings trigger anxiety, which triggers defenses, which create
presenting problems and symptoms.
The patient who does not see causality believes a defense helps her and
will hold onto rather than let go of it. Thus, we have no consensus on the
therapeutic task, so therapy cannot succeed. The patient must let go of her
defenses to co-create a therapeutic alliance.
When the patient begins to see the defense, clarify its price. The
following examples show how to clarify the price of the defense.
“When you underestimate yourself like this, does that make you
depressed?”
“When you doubt yourself like this, could that be keeping you
confused and directionless in life?”
“When you distance yourself from your feelings now, that will
prevent us from getting to the bottom of your difficulties. You say
you want to get to the bottom of what is causing your depression, but
now you are distancing yourself from your feelings, so we won’t be
able to get to the bottom of your difficulties. Do you see how you are
working at cross-purposes with yourself ?”
“If you talk over your feelings, we won’t find out what is going on
underneath, and you’ll keep feeling anxious rather than find out what
feeling is underneath.”
“If we don’t find out what the problem is you would like me to help
you with, we won’t be able to help you.”
Defense Clarification: The Function
Once the patient sees the price of the defense, help her see its function.
For example, you might show her that a defense wards off a feeling, denies
reality, protects someone else, or punishes her.
Th: How do you experience this anger toward your father physically in
your body?
Pt: I think he’s right—maybe I don’t have what it takes to go to college.
Th: When you underestimate yourself like this, do you see how you
look at yourself through his eyes instead of your own? [Identify the
defense.]
Pt: Oh, I criticize myself like he does?
Th: Yeah, do you see how you deal with your anger with him by
criticizing yourself instead? [Clarify the function of the defense.]
Pt: I hadn’t looked at it that way before.
Th: If we take a look at it that way, do you see how criticizing yourself
is a way to cover up your anger toward him? [Clarify the function
of the defense.]
Clarification of Character Defenses
We must clarify character defenses in a different way because character
defenses have a different structure from other defenses. When a patient uses
a character defense, she treats herself the way she was treated in the past.
For instance, a patient who had a critical father criticizes herself. Thus, to
clarify the price of character defenses, we must show the patient the price of
how she relates to herself.
Th: What’s the feeling toward him for slapping you?
Pt: I try not to make too much of it. [Ignores and minimizes her feeling.]
Th: You try not to make too much out of him slapping you. You try not
to make too much out of him bruising you. You try not to make too
much out of him hurting you. Do you notice how you ignore and
dismiss yourself and your feelings? [Identify the defense.]
Pt: Yes, but I do it all the time.
Th: So let’s check in on your goal. Is that what you want to keep doing
—dismissing yourself and your feelings? [Ask if the reason for the
session is to engage in the therapeutic task or the antitherapeutic
task.]
Pt: No.
Th: After all, when you dismiss your feelings and say you don’t want to
make too much out of him slapping you, you invite me to dismiss
you too and say it’s no big deal. What kind of relationship would
we have if we agreed to ignore your feelings when your boyfriend
slaps you? [Clarify the price.]
Pt: Not a good one.
Th: If you ignore your feelings over being slapped, does that make you
more or less likely to choose guys who will slap you? [Clarify the
price.]
Point out the price of the defense today while empathizing with its value
in the past. When the patient feels your empathy for the defense’s origin,
she can more easily let go of it today, feeling compassion for her past
suffering.
Th: We can certainly understand why you laugh over your feelings.
You’ve told me your father hit you and then laughed at your pain.
How wonderful you found that solution to join him and avoid being
hit more, but would you agree that what solved your problem with
your father in the past invites your boyfriend to dismiss your
feelings today?
Pt: When I laugh off my anger, he does too.
Th: Shall we take a stand against that self-dismissal?
Pt: Yes.
Confronting the Defense
If the patient sees the defense, its price, and its function and still uses it,
we must address one more problem before confronting the defense. Often,
patients cannot differentiate themselves from the defense: “That’s just the
way I am.” When the patient identifies herself with her defense, do not
confront it. She will believe you are attacking her as a person rather than
confronting a behavior that hurts her. Identification with a defense is a
central feature of syntonicity. (See chapter 8.)
To differentiate the patient from her defense, we must help her see the
difference between herself as a person and the ways that she handles her
feelings, between her as an agent and the choices she makes.
Th: Do you notice how you are detached now?
Pt: That’s just the way I am. [Identifies with the defense.]
Th: No, it’s not the way you are, but it is the way you deal with your
feelings. [Differentiate the patient from her defense of detaching.]
You detach from your feelings. It is what you do, but as long as you
detach here with me, we will have the same kind of distant,
detached relationship here you had with your ex-husband. [Point
out the price.] Why do that to yourself ?
Once the patient has differentiated herself from her defenses, the
therapist can invite the patient to let go of the defense.
Pt: Yes, but I always detach from feelings. I’ve done it my whole life.
Th: The first question for us is this: what do you want to do about this
detaching here with me? [Point out her task: to progress, she must
let go of her defense.] As long as you remain detached here with
me, this will be a detached relationship just like the one you had
with your ex-husband. [Point out the price.] You said you want to
have healthier relationships, and now we see how this habit could
sabotage the healthy relationship here that you came to have. [Point
out how her defense obstructs her goal.] As long as you detach, this
will be a crippled therapy. What do you want to do about this
destructive mechanism here with me? [Confront the patient with
her task: to let go of the defense.]
When we confront the patient’s defense, we challenge her not just to let
go of her defense but, more importantly, to reach her full potential as a
person. We encourage her to reveal who she really is, hidden underneath her
defenses.
“Is this the optimal level of functioning you aspire to?”
“Is this an example of the kind of person you want to become?”
“Is this behavior your goal, or is this what you want to overcome?”
“Do you want self-doubt to win or you?”
“Do you want to follow self-devaluation or your highest self ?”
“When you put yourself down, are you letting yourself reach your
full potential?”
In this sense, confronting a defense is always encouraging a patient to
face what she fears so she can resume the journey of self-creation that is
personality itself. Every time she lets go of a defense, she makes the choice
to explore her potentials that were hidden by the defense.
In response to defense identification, clarification, and confrontation,
many patients let go of their defenses and face their feelings. However,
some do not. Instead, they begin to distance themselves not just from
feelings but also from the therapist. They resist emotional closeness. Now
the patient enacts a past relationship, the transference, to avoid feelings
toward the therapist. When this happens, shift from doing defense work to
transference resistance work.
Shift from defense work to transference resistance work if the defenses
persist, the patient becomes more distant, the defense work no longer
triggers unconscious signaling of anxiety, or the patient becomes less
collaborative.
TRANSFERENCE RESISTANCE WORK
As you draw attention to the patient’s defenses, his feelings rise. In
response, a highly resistant patient begins to resist emotional closeness by
using nonverbal tactical defenses. The patient begins to avoid your eyes,
assumes an uninvolved tone of voice, crosses his arms and legs, and takes a
slouched position in the chair. He fails to answer your questions, fails to
agree on the existence of a problem, or fails to declare his will to engage in
the therapeutic task. He fails to give a specific example or declare a feeling.
The patient’s resistance triggers countertransference feelings in the therapist
(T. Ogden 1982; Racker 1968). The therapist may become angry with the
patient and his resistance. Or the therapist may ignore the resistance,
working even harder.
Now the patient’s defenses create a pathological relationship, keeping
the therapist at a distance. So we shift from defense work to transference
resistance work. Rather than address single defenses, focus on how the
patient relates to the therapist. Transference resistance work has three
stages: (1) identification, (2) clarification, and (3) confrontation.
Confronting the transference resistance will go much more smoothly when
you follow this sequence: (1) defense identification, (2) defense
clarification, (3) defense confrontation, (4) transference resistance
identification, (5) transference resistance clarification, and (6) confrontation
of the transference resistance. The patient will see his transference
resistance clearly and understand why you are confronting its destructive
effects.
Principle: When defense work yields little benefit, shift your focus from
individual defenses to the therapeutic relationship. Focus on
how the patient avoids you and the price: a crippled
relationship and a failed therapy.
Transference Resistance Identification
First identify the transference resistance so the patient can observe it.
Then clarify its price and function. Then assess whether he recognizes he is
not the same as his resistance: “That’s just the way I am.” Once he can see
those elements, confront the transference resistance.
Start identifying the transference resistance by pointing out to the
patient the defenses he uses to distance himself from the therapist.
“Notice how you are looking away?”
“Notice how you are going up in your head and having a
conversation with yourself ?”
“Notice how you are pulling back from me right now?”
“Notice how you are detaching again?”
“Notice how you are sitting here? If one of your employees sat with
you like this in an interview, how involved would you say he is?”
Identify defenses to point out the relationship the patient is creating. The
following vignette shows how to help a patient see and reflect on the way
he relates to the therapist.
Pt: I don’t think I’m distancing.
Th: Do you notice how you are looking at the carpet instead of me?
[Point out the defense by which he resists emotional closeness with
the therapist.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: That’s a sign of distancing. Do you see what I mean?
Pt: Yes.
Th: You see this wall of distancing that comes up between us. Do you
notice how you are silent and go up in your head? [Identify the
resistance to emotional closeness.]
Pt: Yes, but I’m thinking.
Th: You think by yourself rather than talk out loud here with me. That’s
becoming a barrier between you and me. First you form this wall of
distancing, and now a wall of silence comes up between you and
me. [Identify the resistance to emotional closeness.]
Pt: It’s just easier for me that way.
Th: It’s easier for you to put up this wall between you and me, just like
the wall you say you have with your wife. What will happen here if
you keep up the same wall of distancing and silence between you
and me? [Invite the patient to see the price of the resistance.]
Pt: Nothing.
Th: And obviously you have not come here to achieve nothing.
Pt: No.
Th: You want to achieve your goals here, but your wall of silencing and
distancing is defeating you. What do you think we can do about this
wall coming up between us? [Once the patient sees his transference
resistance, invite him to turn against it.]
A patient cannot turn against a transference resistance if he does not see
it. Any time a therapy is stuck, assess your relationship with the patient. Is
he active or passive? Does he join you or resist you? Is he involved or
uninvolved? Describe each defense in terms of its relational impact: as a
barrier to a collaborative relationship.
Transference Resistance Clarification
The second step is clarification, showing the patient the price and
function of the transference resistance. Point out the destructive effects.
Maintaining a pathological relationship with the therapist will result in the
patient’s continual suffering from symptoms, loneliness, defeat of the
therapy, and failure to achieve his healthy goals.
The following interventions show how to clarify the price of the
transference resistance:
“You say this wall protects you, but hasn’t it destroyed your three
marriages and left you a lonely woman?”
“You can keep this wall. After all, it is yours. And how wonderful
that you can keep it, but as long as you keep up this wall with me, it
will cause the therapy to end in failure just like your other therapies.
Why set yourself up like that again? Haven’t you suffered enough?”
“You say you want me to help you, but at the same time you tell me
to stop asking questions. I can do that. I have no right to ask you
questions you don’t want to answer, but as long as we don’t ask the
questions you came here to answer, what will happen?”
“If you keep up this wall of devaluation, we will have only a crippled
relationship that will be doomed to failure. No good can result if you
keep this destructive wall here between you and me.”
“This wall of distancing will prevent us from getting to the bottom of
your difficulties. There is no law that says you have to reveal
yourself to me. You have every right to maintain this wall, but then I
will remain another useless person in your life.”
“If you put up this wall of words, we won’t find out who you are
behind that wall, and you’ll keep feeling anxious and depressed. Can
we find out who you really are behind that wall?”
The following interventions show how to clarify the function of the
transference resistance:
“This wall keeps us at a distance.”
“As long as you maintain this wall, I will be on one side, you will be
on the other, and I will be unable to help you.”
“Notice how you try to have a conversation with yourself in your
head rather than talk to me? Notice how you put up this barrier to
avoid relating here to me?”
“You cover your feelings with thoughts, but these thoughts are a wall
you put up here between you and me. As long as you put up this wall
of thoughts, we won’t find out who you really are behind this wall.”
“When you put up this wall of doubt between me and you, does this
advance our therapy or is it a barrier to our working together?”
We no longer talk about a specific defense but the wall the defense
creates. Letting go of one defense does nothing if the patient continues to
relate to you pathologically. In the transference resistance, each defense is
merely a brick in the wall. So address the wall as a whole: the relationship.
The patient must see causality clearly. Otherwise, we have no agreement
on the therapeutic task. He will continue to enact a past relationship, and the
therapy will fail. When the patient sees how his transference resistance
creates his suffering, he can turn against it and face his feelings instead.
Now he can co-create the therapeutic alliance with the therapist.
Use the following steps when identifying and clarifying the resistance:
1. Point out a behavior several times so the patient can see it: “Do you
notice how you look away? Do you notice how you avoid my gaze?
Do you notice how you look at the floor?”
2. Point out the wall when the patient sees the behaviors: “Do you
notice how there is a wall of avoidance coming up here between you
and me?”
3. Point out his agency: “Do you notice you put up a wall of avoidance
here between you and me?”
4. Point out the price: “As long as you put up this wall of avoidance
here between you and me, I will be on one side, and you will be on
the other side of the wall, and I won’t be able to help you.”
5. Invite the patient to let go of the resistance: “What do you think we
can do about this wall?”
When the patient sees the transference resistance and its function and
price, confront it. (See chapter 13.)
Transference Resistance and Inviting Feelings Toward the
Therapist
To reduce the resistance and increase the rise of feelings, the therapist
needs to (1) identify, clarify, and confront the transference resistance and (2)
invite feelings toward the therapist, which the transference wards off:
“Notice how you put up this wall of words and stories between us? This
wall creates distance between us. As long as it’s here, we can’t get a clear
look at your difficulties. What is the feeling toward me that leads you to put
up this wall?”
This is one of the most important points we can make. When the patient
resists closeness with you, it is because he experiences feelings toward you
based on his past relational experience. The transference (his behavior) is a
resistance against experiencing the feelings toward you. Thus, when we
address the transference resistance (the behavior by which he avoids
feelings toward you), we always follow up by asking what feelings he has
toward the therapist that make him put up this wall. And we will continue
asking about the feelings toward the therapist until he can experience them
as deeply as possible, which will lead to a breakthrough to the unconscious.
The patient is in conflict. He wants to face his feelings, and he resists
them. Mobilize his will to become well (inviting feeling, mobilize him to
the task), point out the cost and suffering inflicted by the transference
resistance, and then ask about the feelings toward the therapist. In this way,
you will decrease his resistance and mobilize his unconscious feelings,
preparing the way for a breakthrough to unconscious feelings.
Although we have just been talking about the transference resistance, in
fact, patients resist feelings with different kinds of defenses. Thus, we can
talk about levels of resistance.
Moderately resistant patients use repressive and tactical defenses.
Identify and clarify the defenses to access their feelings.
Fragile patients may use repressive, tactical, and character defenses,
but with a rise of feeling and anxiety, repressive defenses eventually
fail. In response, the patient resorts to regressive defenses. Help the
patient observe and let go of these defenses to tolerate higher levels
of feeling (see chapters 7 and 9).
Highly resistant patients, however, do not benefit from defense
identification and clarification alone. These patients use defenses to
form a wall (enacting a past relationship) to distance themselves
from the therapist. Point out the ways the patient distances himself in
therapy. Once the patient sees and begins to turn against the wall, ask
about his feeling toward you. Address each defense as a wall
between the therapist and patient. Continue inviting feelings and
addressing the transference resistance until a breakthrough to the
unconscious occurs. Either the patient will experience grief and guilt
over the suffering he has inflicted on himself through his defenses or
he will experience a breakthrough of complex feelings toward the
therapist. This ushers in the breakthrough to the unconscious.
SUMMARY
First identify the defense. If the defense persists, clarify its function and
price. If the defense still persists, confront the defense. If the defense
persists, most likely the patient is enacting a character defense or a
transference resistance. Identify the character defense or transference
resistance, and then clarify its function and price. If it persists, confront the
character defense or transference resistance. Then a breakthrough to feeling
will occur.
In summary, all patients use defenses to avoid feelings and anxiety. Help
them see and let go of the defenses that create their presenting problems and
symptoms. Address defenses moment by moment in the here and now so
the patient’s suffering can end as soon as possible.
Principle: Address the patient’s defense as soon as she uses it. That
promotes experiential learning.
When helping the patient see and let go of his defenses, his capacity for
self-observation should be mobilized in a stepwise fashion. Figure 3.1
shows the steps for mobilizing the patient’s self-observing capacities and
the order in which they should be mobilized.
Figure 3.1 Decision tree for defense work
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Blackman, J. (2004). 101 defenses: How the mind shields itself. New York:
Taylor and Francis.
Coughlin Della Selva, P. (1996). Working with defenses. In Intensive shortterm dynamic psychotherapy: Theory and technique (pp. 53–78). New
York: Wiley.
Cramer, P. (2006). Protecting the self: Defense mechanisms in action. New
York: Guilford Press.
Cramer, P. (2008). Seven pillars of defense mechanism theory. Social and
Personality Psychology Compass, 2, 1963–1981. This article
summarizes all the current research supporting the concept of defense.
Frederickson, J. (1999). Theory of defense analysis and defense analysis
studies. In Psychodynamic psychotherapy: Learning to listen from
multiple perspectives (pp. 165–204). New York: Taylor and Francis.
These chapters will teach you how to recognize when a patient uses a
defense.
P
CHAPTER FOUR
Tactical and Repressive Defenses
atients can use tactical, repressive, character, and regressive defenses
(Davanloo 2000, 111–181). Since these defenses have different
purposes and structures, they require different types of intervention.
Thus, we devote separate chapters to these defense groups.
Repressive defenses keep feelings out of awareness. Tactical defenses
(Davanloo 1990, 2000) also repress feelings, but function primarily as a
tactic to keep the therapist at a distance. They reveal a resistance to
emotional closeness. Moderately resistant patients let go of repressive
defenses easily to face their feelings. Highly resistant patients continue to
use tactical and character defenses to distance themselves from the
therapist. Address these defenses or the patient will remain distant and fail
to form a therapeutic alliance.
Since repressive defenses can be used to keep the therapist at a distance,
it can be difficult to differentiate them from tactical defenses. Here, we
focus on tactical defenses that avoid feelings and increase the distance from
the therapist. The later examples of repressive defenses show patients who
try to connect to the therapist but avoid their feelings.
TACTICAL DEFENSES
Tactical defenses function as tactics to keep the therapist at a distance.
Among the most common tactical defenses are cover words, distancing,
diversification, evasiveness, generalization, indirect or hypothetical speech,
retraction, rumination, and vagueness. In the following vignettes, the
principle of intervention will remain the same: help the patient see the
defense and its price so he can let go of his defense and face his problems
and feelings.
Cover Words
When we invite the patient to describe what he feels, he may offer a
watered-down word rather than the feeling. For instance, rather than say he
feels angry with the boss who publicly humiliated him, he may say he feels
frustrated, upset, irritated, or uncomfortable. These words cover his true
feeling, anger. Here we look at a different example.
Pt: As you know from the phone call I left, my wife died yesterday.
Th: I’m so sorry. What feeling are you having over your wife’s death?
Pt: I feel upset. [Defense: cover word.]
Th: Obviously, her death upset your entire world. What is your feeling
over losing her?
Pt: I’m still in shock.
Th: Of course, it came as a shock since you didn’t know she had cancer.
What is the feeling over losing her?
Pt: It’s terrible. [Defense: Cover word.]
Th: I agree. What are you feeling over her loss?
Pt: I feel lost without her. [Defense: Cover word.]
Th: You are without her. You lost her, and obviously this triggers a lot of
feelings over losing her, holding her hand while she died, and
making the funeral arrangements.
Pt: [Tears form in his eyes.]
Th: What are you feeling now?
Pt: I’m sad.
Point out and block tactical defenses so feelings can rise to the surface.
Distancing
Some patients will use gestures, tone of voice, and words to maintain
interpersonal distance from the therapist. As an analogy, imagine knocking
on someone’s door (J. Ten Have de Labije, personal communication). He
talks to you through the door, but does not open it to let you in the house.
Thus, the therapist must address this defense of distancing to have any
genuine contact with the patient.
Th: You want me to help you with this powerful anger you feel toward
this doctor whose malpractice left you in pain?
Pt: Sure. [Defense: Said in a diffident tone of voice.]
Th: You don’t sound sure. [Point out the nonverbal distancing.]
Pt: No, I’m sure. [Defense: Looks away.]
Th: Do you notice how you turn away right now and look out the
window? [Point out the behavior.]
Pt: Yeah, what of it?
Th: Do you notice how you are distancing yourself from me right now?
[Point out the defense.]
Pt: [Looks back at the therapist.] Yeah, I notice that.
Th: If you distance yourself, that’s going to get in our way here. What
do you think we can do about this tendency to distance yourself
from me? [The patient must see and let go of the defense to get
better.]
Diversification
The patient may change topics to avoid feelings. This is not free
association to the feeling. Rather, it is associating away from the feeling.
Block the defense and return to the focus.
Th: You mention that you have conflicts with your husband. Can we
take a look at a specific example where you were in conflict with
him?
Pt: First I should probably tell you about my aunt. [Defense:
diversification.]
Th: Before we get to that, could we look at a specific example where
you have a conflict with your husband? [Block the diversification.]
Pt: He and I were going to the mall to go shopping. I really like
shopping at Macy’s, but then there was this sale at Filene’s.
[Defense: diversification.]
Th: [Interrupts.] You are doing a beautiful job telling me about your
shopping trip, but can we hear a specific example of a conflict you
had with your husband? [Block the diversification.]
Pt: I’m getting there. It’s just that I wanted to get some shoes at the
store after I bought a dress I had seen in the window. [Defense:
diversification.]
Th: [Interrupts.] Do you notice that when I ask you to give me a
specific example of a conflict with your husband, you go off to
shopping, to Filene’s, and then to your shoes? Do you notice how
you avoid this conflict with your husband by going off to other
topics instead? [Point out the pattern of diversification.]
Pt: I know. My husband always tells me how I talk all over the place.
Th: Do you see how right now you change topics to move away from
talking about the conflict with your husband? [Point out the defense
and clarify its function.]
Pt: I do now that you point it out.
Th: This is very important. You have asked for my help in dealing with
your conflicts with your husband, right?
Pt: Yes.
Th: It’s important because you want to get help with these conflicts, but
then we see that changing topics deprives you of the help you want.
You ignore your problems here by talking about Filene’s and shoes.
Then you invite me to pay attention to Filene’s instead of your
problems. It’s as if your problems are the last thing to which we
should pay attention. Do you see what I mean? [Point out the
defense of diversification and its destructive effects.]
Pt: [Tears.] I hadn’t thought about it like that.
Th: Could this be a way you put yourself at the end of the line? You
invite me to give more attention to shoes and Filene’s department
store than to you? Do you think that might be a way you deprive
yourself of our attention to you? [Point out the price of
diversification: she ignores her inner life and invites others to do
the same.]
Pt: I do put myself last. [Sees the defense.]
Evasiveness
Some patients avoid giving clear, concise answers, so the therapist
cannot get a clear picture of their difficulties. Help the patient by pointing
out the defense of evasiveness.
Th: You mentioned that you had a conflict at work.
Pt: I don’t know if I would say it was a conflict—maybe more of a
disagreement or a discussion. [Defense: evasiveness.]
Th: First you said it was a conflict, then you said it’s a disagreement,
and now you say it’s a discussion. Do you notice how you avoid
giving a clear answer? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: It’s a complicated situation. I don’t know how to describe it.
[Defense: evasiveness.]
Th: Actually, you have described it in three ways, but you keep shifting.
Do you notice how you avoid saying what happened at work?
[Point out the defense.]
Pt: I’m trying to.
Th: You describe what happened at work but not in a clear way. [Point
out the defense.]
Pt: My boss says I’m not clear. [Rise in self-awareness.]
Th: And now we see here how you avoid giving a clear answer about
this problem at work. If we don’t get a clear picture, we won’t be
able to help you with this problem at work. [Point out the price of
the defense.]
Pt: Okay, it was a conflict I had with my boss.
Generalization
A patient may describe himself in general terms with the therapist. Point
out and block this defense and help the patient become more specific.
Th: What is the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: It’s not a specific problem. More of a general problem. Perhaps it’s
an emotional problem. I don’t know. [Defense: generalization.]
Th: But specifically, what is the emotional problem you would like me
to help you with? [Block the defense: encourage the patient to be
specific.]
Pt: Like I said, it’s not a specific problem. My previous therapist called
it a personality disorder. [Defense: generalization.]
Th: If we leave your previous therapist out of this, what is the emotional
problem you would like me to help you with? [Block the defense,
and return the focus to an internal emotional problem.]
Pt: There is a behavioral problem. [Defense: generalization.]
Th: What is the behavioral problem you would like me to help you
with?
Pt: There’s a tendency in certain situations to avoid intimacy. [Defense:
generalization.]
Th: Do you notice how you speak in generalities: “certain situations”?
Do you notice how you are vague here with me? [Point out the
defense.]
Pt: Vague? Yes, I’m vague.
Th: As long as we talk in these vague generalities, we won’t get a clear
idea of your internal difficulties, and this will just be another failed
therapy. What do you think we can do about this tendency to speak
in vague generalities here? [Point out the price of the defense, and
encourage the patient to let go of it.]
Pt: I guess I need to try not to be vague.
Th: If you don’t go off to these generalities, what’s the problem you
would like me to help you with?
Pt: My girlfriend said I should come because of something that
happened between us.
Although we still don’t know the internal emotional problem, the
defense work has helped him shift to a clearer description of his problem.
We would continue our inquiry about the incident with his girlfriend and
work on his tactical defenses.
Indirect or Hypothetical Speech
Rather than make a clear statement about an anxiety-laden topic,
patients qualify it. They say “probably,” “maybe,” “could be,” “I suppose,”
“I guess so,” “you may be right,” “sort of,” or “I must be feeling sad.”
Through these terms they turn a fact into a mere hypothesis.
Th: You mention you have problems of intimacy with your wife. Is this
the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: I suppose. [Defense: hypothetical speech.]
Th: You suppose? Either it is or it isn’t. [Block the defense.]
Pt: It could be. [Defense: hypothetical speech.]
Th: Again you say “could be.” Either it is the problem you want me to
help you with or it isn’t. [Block the defense.]
Pt: Maybe it is, and maybe it isn’t. [Defense: hypothetical speech.]
Th: Again you sit on the fence. You notice how you say “suppose,”
“could be,” and “maybe”? Do you notice how you leave things in
the air? [Point out and block the defense.]
Pt: It’s sort of a problem in my opinion. [Defense: hypothetical speech.]
Th: You say “sort of.” Do you notice how you water things down?
[Point out and block the defense.]
Pt: I guess so. [Defense: hypothetical speech.]
Th: You guess so? Either you see that you are indefinite or you don’t.
Which is it? [Block the defense.]
Pt: I guess you could say I leave things indefinite. [Defenses:
hypothetical speech and projection onto the therapist.]
Th: But in your opinion? [Block the defense of projection since it is the
more pathological of the two defenses the patient uses in this
moment.]
Pt: I leave things indefinite. I think that’s a possibility. [Defense:
hypothetical speech.]
Th: A possibility? Do you notice how you keep both feet firmly on the
fence? Do you see how you leave everything indefinite and vague?
How you refuse to say clearly where you stand? [Point out and
block the defense.]
Pt: Now that you mention it.
Block indefinite speech, point it out to the patient, and call into question
his stance of never declaring himself clearly.
Retraction
Retraction is a form of undoing. The patient says something and then
takes it back.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for saying that?
Pt: I was angry.
Th: How do you experience that anger physically in your body?
Pt: I don’t know that it was anger, more irritation. [Defense: retraction.]
Th: Do you notice how you move away from your anger? [Point out the
defense.]
Pt: I wouldn’t say I was angry. [Defense: retraction.]
Th: You said you were angry. Now you try to unsay it. Do you see what
I mean? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: Maybe I wasn’t angry. [Defense: retraction.]
Th: But you said you were. As soon as you say you were angry, you try
to take it back. Do you see what I mean? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: Maybe I didn’t feel angry at all. [Defense: retraction.]
Th: Now you try to erase your anger. First you say you were angry, then
you try to take it back, and then you try to erase it. Do you see how
you avoid your anger? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: I do now.
Rumination
Wondering, speculating, and ruminating can look like collaboration, but
they are defenses. The patient ends up in a state of confusion to avoid the
experience of his feelings. Interrupt rumination. Help the patient see and
turn against it.
Pt: Other therapists have said that I have a tendency to be passiveaggressive. [Defenses: rumination and projection onto other
therapists.]
Th: And you? Is it your opinion that you are passive-aggressive? [Block
the projection.]
Pt: I guess, given that a number of previous therapists have indicated—
[Defenses: rumination and projection.]
Th: [Interrupts the rumination.] But in your opinion? [Block the
projection.]
Pt: Uh, yes, I would say I am passive-aggressive. Of course, that could
be due to neurotransmitters, my psychiatrist said— [Defense:
rumination.]
Th: [Interrupts the rumination.] But if we don’t go off to
neurotransmitters, you say you are passive-aggressive?
Pt: Yes, I suppose that is an area of my psychotherapy that has not been
resolved, so I am disappointed about that. [Defense: rumination.]
Several other forms of rumination deserve mention. When patients
ruminate about what others might feel or think, block it.
Pt: I think the reason he did that was because the stock market fell that
day.
Th: We can only speculate about what he feels, but we could get
absolutely clear about what you feel. Can we take a look at what
the feeling is toward him for firing you?
Some patients ruminate about the past. When this happens, block the
rumination.
Pt: I wonder what would have happened if—
Th: [Interrupts.] We can only speculate about what never happened. If
we don’t go off to fantasy, can we take a look at the feeling toward
him for firing you?
Patients may ruminate about the future.
Pt: If that happens again, I can imagine taking him to the top of the
tower—
Th: Do you notice you go off to a fantasy of the future to avoid your
feelings right now? If we leave the fantasy to the side, what is the
feeling toward him for firing you?
A patient may ruminate rather than declare his will to engage in therapy.
Do not explore the rumination. Block it and focus on the patient’s will to
engage in the task.
Pt: I’m afraid I will find out something about myself that I won’t like.
Th: You probably will. Are you willing to face that?
If the patient says he “dreads” what he will find out about himself in the
therapy, rather than ask about his rumination, you can say, “You are afraid
of what you will discover. You can avoid this fear and never find out what is
going on underneath your symptoms. Or we can face this fear together and
find out what has been causing your difficulties. Which way do you think
will be best for you?”
Vagueness
When patients remain vague about the problem for which they seek
your help or about an example of it, they make it impossible for the two of
you to get a clear picture of the problem. Always help the patient see and let
go of the defense of vagueness so you can get a clear understanding of the
triangle of conflict.
Th: What is the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: It’s a relationship problem of sorts. [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: Do you notice how you become vague when I ask about your
problem? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: It is kind of vague. I’m not really sure there is a specific problem
really. [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: Do you notice though that you are being vague? [Point out the
defense.]
Pt: I’m vague, but the problem is vague I think. [Defense: vagueness.]
Th: But the problem is that as long as you are vague, we won’t get a
clear picture of your difficulties. And if we don’t get a clear picture
of your difficulties, I won’t be able to help you. [Point out the
defense and the price: therapy won’t help him.]
Pt: I see what you mean. The problem is I got fired at my workplace
after getting into an argument with my boss. [Now the problem
emerges more clearly.]
For more extensive commentary on tactical defenses, see Davanloo
2000, 111–181.
REPRESSIVE DEFENSES
Tactical defenses have an interpersonal function: to keep the therapist at
a distance. Repressive defenses have an intrapsychic function: to keep
feelings at a distance. Among the most common repressive defenses are
avoidance, denial, displacement, identification with the aggressor,
identification with the object of one’s rage, instant repression,
intellectualization, isolation of affect, minimization, rationalization, reaction
formation, and suppression. The principle in these vignettes is always the
same, help the patient see and let go of his defense, so he can face his
warded-off feeling.
Avoidance
All defenses serve to avoid feelings. In the following example, the
patient admits she avoids her feelings. The therapist must remind the patient
that avoiding feelings is the antitherapeutic task. Facing the feelings we
usually avoid is the task that accomplishes the goals of therapy.
Th: How do you experience this sadness over your husband’s death?
Pt: I try to avoid any reminders of it. [Defense: avoidance.]
Th: To avoid your sadness. Do you notice how you are trying to avoid
your sadness right now here with me? [Point out the defense in the
here and now.]
Pt: I don’t want to face it. [The defense of avoidance is syntonic, so the
therapist must help the patient let go of the defense.]
Th: You don’t have to face this sadness. You have been able to avoid it
for the past two years since he died, and you can avoid it for the
rest of your life if you want. [Deactivate the projection of her
healthy desire to face her feelings.] But as long as you avoid your
sadness, we won’t be able to help you mourn his death and put an
end to this depression. As long as you avoid these feelings about
him, your suffering will continue. [Point out the price of the
defense.] Why do that to yourself ?
Pt: I don’t want to suffer anymore. It’s just that I’m scared of feeling the
sadness.
Th: We can face that fear and master it so that you can overcome this
depression, or you can avoid this sadness and remain depressed.
But obviously you have not come here to continue your suffering.
Pt: No. I remember the day I heard he died. I shut down completely.
[With this memory, she signals her willingness to explore her
sadness and grief.]
Denial
Denial is a way to ignore reality. Anna Freud (1936) proposed the
following four ways to deny the existence of reality:
Denial per se: Saying that something in reality does not exist
Denial in fantasy: Paying attention to a fantasy rather than reality
Denial in words: Paying attention to false words rather than reality
Denial in deed: Behaving as if something in reality does not exist
All of us use denial at one time or another, so we must assess it. Is the
patient’s denial due to an inability to test reality? That would be a sign of
psychotic illness. Or does the patient see reality but deny it to avoid internal
emotional conflict? That is a sign of neurotic illness (Blackman 2004).
Defenses That Deny Reality
Many defenses can be enlisted for the purpose of denying reality,
including the following:
Withdrawal of attention: When a patient uses denial, she withdraws
her attention from external stimuli or internal feelings that would
cause pain and anxiety. The patient sees neither the stimulus nor her
feeling because she does not look at them.
Negative hallucination: The patient sees what is not there to avoid
what is there in reality. She may say, “He asked me to set the
wedding date,” when in fact, her fiancé had just ended the
engagement.
Ignoring: This is a less extreme form of denial because reality can be
brought back into focus. When patients ignore the stimulus to feeling
or their feelings, they fail to see essential aspects of reality and
misperceive the meaning of events.
Negation: The patient perceives her feeling but negates its meaning.
For example, a patient who has just been cruelly rejected by her exfiancé may say, “I do not feel angry.”
Minimization: The patient perceives the stimulus (the rejection) but
minimizes her emotional reaction to it. For example, she may say, “I
feel maybe a little bothered.”
Overexaggeration: The patient not only denies reality but
exaggerates the opposite feeling. She believes this exaggerated
fantasy to avoid facing the reality of his rejection. For example, she
may say, “I am even more in love with him than ever. I can hardly
wait to make love to him again.”
Reversal: The patient changes her experience of anger into its
opposite. She may say, “I feel quite happy.”
Ridicule: The patient perceives the stimulus (the rejection) but denies
its importance and, thus, the reality of any feeling response. She may
say, “Oh that? That was nothing. I’ve had many men before. I’ll
have many men in the future.”
Fantasy: The patient acknowledges her perception of reality but
changes it into a less threatening fantasy. She relates only to those
portions of reality consistent with her fantasy. Her fantasy about
reality takes precedence over her perception of it (see Cramer 2006,
44–46). She may say, “I know he’ll get over it. He really loves me.
It’s just a phase he is going through.”
All forms of denial interfere with the perception of reality. The patient
does not see, avoids, or distorts what she perceives. Reality is not
threatening because she does not perceive it.
Denial Per Se
With denial per se, the patient denies reality despite overwhelming
evidence to the contrary. Remind the patient of his denial and the reality he
denies. Do not argue with the patient. Let the reminders of reality do the
work for you.
A patient mourning the recent death of his wife reports that he plans to
visit a woman who enjoys bondage and discipline, a form of
sadomasochistic enactment.
Pt: I know when I go to see her that either I’ll feel guilty for going or
she’ll make me feel shitty.
Th: I want to go visit a woman who makes me feel guilty and shitty.
[Mirror the contradiction.]
Pt: I find her very interesting. [Defense: denial of who he is meeting and
why.]
Th: I am very interested in a woman who makes me feel guilty and
shitty. [Mirror the contradiction.]
Pt: I know I’ll feel worse about myself.
Th: I want to meet a woman who will make me feel worse about myself.
[Mirror the contradiction.]
Pt: [Laughs.] I know it sounds crazy. I know she will either reject me or
run away from me.
Th: I want a woman to reject me or run away from me. [Mirror the
contradiction.]
Pt: Hmm. It is a distraction from all this sadness over Anne’s death.
Th: I want a woman to reject me so I don’t have to face the sadness over
Anne’s leaving me through death. [Point out the function of the
denial: to avoid the grief over his wife’s death.]
Pt: It’s so painful. [Face contorted in pain and grief as he cries.]
Denial in Fantasy
With denial in fantasy, the patient denies reality by paying attention to a
fantasy. Help the patient see the contrast between reality and her fantasy.
A patient’s son has recently been arrested and has a history of lying to
her.
Pt: He said he was not drinking anymore, so I was shocked to learn that
he was drinking again. [Defense: denial in fantasy.]
Th: I expect my son who lies to tell me the truth. [Point out the defense:
she pays attention to the fantasy son she wishes she had rather than
her real son.]
Pt: But I was shocked! [Defense: denial in fantasy.]
Th: Of course, you were. If you see the truth and then deny it, you will
be shocked when the truth shows up again. [“Shocked” is the result
when the patient denies reality and reality shows up anyway.]
Pt: I see. If I deny the truth, then I am surprised when he lies again.
[Improved reality testing.]
Th: You see the truth. You deny it. Then you are shocked. The denial
hurts you. When you deny it again, you set up the whole cycle of
self-harm.
Pt: But he really hurts me. [Projection: she hurts herself when she uses
denial.]
Th: May I offer another perspective?
Pt: Yes.
Th: The first time he hurt you by lying to you. But if you had faced the
truth that first time, he could never have hurt you again because you
would have been prepared to deal with a liar. Instead, each time you
denied the reality that he lies, you set yourself up to be shocked and
hurt. I would propose that he hurt you once, but your denial has
hurt you hundreds of times. Would you agree? [Point out the
externalization: she punishes herself by denying his lying, but she
blames him for the way her denial hurts her.]
Denial in Words
With denial in words, the patient denies reality by paying attention to
someone’s words, not his deeds. Reminding the patient of the difference
between what someone says and does may not help because the intervention
does not address her denial. Point out that she listens to the other person’s
words and ignores his deeds. This denial through words or selective
inattention is the key.
A patient in an abusive marriage says her husband hit her.
Th: What are you feeling toward him for hitting you in the face this
week?
Pt: We talked about it, and he said he’s sorry, and he won’t do it again.
[Defense: denial in words.]
Th: You pay attention to his words rather than his deeds. [Point out the
denial.]
Pt: But he said he wouldn’t do it again. [Defense: denial in words.]
Th: That is what he said. Do you notice you pay attention to what he
said but not what he did? [Point out the denial in words.]
Pt: But he said he was sorry. [Defense: denial in words.]
Th: But do you notice that you pay attention to what he says and ignore
what he does?
Pt: My mom says that too. [Defense: projection—“That’s not what I
think; that’s what my mom thinks.”]
Th: What’s your opinion? Do you notice you believe his words and try
not to believe his fists? [Point out the denial.]
Pt: Hmm. I hadn’t thought of it that way.
Denial in Deed
With denial in deed, the patient denies reality by acting on the basis of
his fantasy. Remind the patient of the difference between reality and the
fantasy upon which his actions are based.
Pt: I talked to Jennifer on the phone and told her I thought we could still
work things out between us. I asked her if I could come over to her
place and talk things out, but she said, “Don’t even think of it. I
don’t ever want to see you again.” But I figured, “Hey, if we don’t
talk this through, we can’t ever work this out.” So I drove over to
her place and went up to the door and pushed the doorbell. She
comes to the front door, opens it, curses at me, throws a glass of
water on me, and then tells me to get the hell out of her life. Can
you believe that?” [Defense: denial in deed. Rather than face this
sad reality, the patient acts as if this is not reality.]
Th: You visited a woman who said she didn’t want to see you again.
[Point out the denial in fantasy.]
Pt: But how are we going to work this out? [Denial per se.]
Th: I want to work things out with a woman who doesn’t want to work
things out with me. [Point out the denial in fantasy.]
Pt: But shouldn’t we be able to work things out? [Defense: denial in
fantasy.]
Th: Shouldn’t reality be different from what reality is? [Mirror the
patient’s denial in fantasy.]
Pt: Shouldn’t it? [Defense: denial in fantasy.]
Th: No. Reality is what it is, but you act as if Jennifer wants to work
things out when in reality she doesn’t want to. And when you act as
if you can ignore reality, you get hurt and set yourself up for more
punishment. Don’t get me wrong. You can keep on acting as if
reality doesn’t exist, but we shouldn’t be surprised when reality
shows up.
Pt: [Chuckles.] That’s true.
Displacement
Displacement involves expressing a feeling toward someone or
something else rather than toward the person where the feeling belongs. A
patient describes how his boss humiliated him in front of colleagues during
a business meeting.
Pt: And then I went back to the office and sat down. I was so furious, I
slammed my fist on the desk. [Defense: he displaces the rage he
felt toward his boss onto his desk instead.]
Th: But the desk didn’t do anything to you, did it?
Pt: No.
Th: Obviously this anger wasn’t intended for the desk, was it?
Pt: No, I was furious toward Alex.
Th: You felt the rage toward Alex, but it came out toward your desk
instead.
Identification with the Aggressor
The patient may identify with the person who hurt her to avoid feeling
anger toward him. The patient may take the point of view of the other
person and agree with his criticisms, for instance. Help her differentiate
herself from the aggressor.
Th: What’s the feeling toward your professor who ridiculed your paper
and then threw it into the trash can right in front of you?
Pt: I think he was right. It probably was a dumb paper. [Defense:
identification with the aggressor. She adopts her professor’s point
of view.]
Th: Do you notice you put yourself down now? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: What?
Th: Do you notice how you put yourself down now and call your paper
dumb? Do you notice that? [Point out her defense.]
Pt: Yes, but—
Th: [Interrupts the patient’s likely continuation of self-attack.] Do you
notice how you put yourself down now just like your professor did?
[Point out the defense.]
Pt: I didn’t see that before. But what if he is right? [Defense:
identification with the aggressor.]
Th: Do you think it is right to put yourself down and call yourself
dumb? Do you think that is the optimal way to treat yourself?
[Point out how she treats herself.]
Pt: No.
Th: Do you notice how you began to put yourself down just after you
described how your professor did that?
Pt: I see what you mean, but why is that important?
Th: Because putting yourself down makes you depressed. If you don’t
put yourself down, what is the feeling toward the professor for
disrespecting you?
Pt: I was angry.
Th: You felt angry with him for criticizing you unfairly. Then you
turned your anger toward him back onto yourself by criticizing
yourself. In effect, you did to yourself what he had done to you. Do
you see what I mean?
Identification with the Object of One’s Rage
Sometimes patients ward off their rage by identifying with the person
with whom they are enraged. One moment they experience anger toward
someone, and the next moment they say, “But I do the same thing.” They
identify with the other person, no longer aware of their rage toward him.
Pt: I feel like you weren’t so helpful in the last session.
Th: And it sounds like you have some feeling about it.
Pt: Yes.
Th: So what’s the feeling toward me for not helping you more?
Pt: I’m angry.
Th: How do you experience this anger toward me for not helping you
more?
Pt: I’m just angry.
Th: And how do you experience this anger toward me in your body?
Pt: I’m hardly one to talk. I have been holding feelings back. [Defense:
identifying with the object of his rage. First he said that the
therapist did not help him. Now he turns the roles around and says
he is not helping himself.]
Th: Do you notice you are describing your behavior now? A moment
ago you were freer to talk about the fact that I didn’t help you last
time. If we don’t turn the camera back onto you, how do you
experience this anger toward me?
Pt: I’m not being fair. After all, you have been really helpful. [Defense.]
Th: And yet we see you feel angry because I didn’t help you last time. If
we don’t turn the criticism back onto you, can we take a look at this
anger toward me? [Point out the defense of identifying with the
person he criticizes.]
Pt: I didn’t see that.
Th: If you don’t turn the criticism and anger back onto yourself, let’s see
how you experience this anger toward me. [Point out the defense
and then encourage him to face his feeling toward the therapist.]
Instant Repression
Defenses can immediately repress awareness of a stimulus or the
resulting feeling (Davanloo 1990, 2000). This occurs in patients suffering
from depressive, functional, and psychosomatic disorders. A patient
describes an argument with his wife while clenching his fists, then he drops
his hands, which become limp: instant repression of the angry impulse. If
asked what his impulse was, he won’t know. If asked what his feeling is
toward his wife, he won’t know, or he will say he is anxious. Without an
awareness of his feeling, the patient cannot differentiate his feeling from
anxiety.
Address the defenses that create instant repression. Otherwise, each
time you ask about rage, the patient will use instant repression and suffer
symptoms of depression or somatic complaints. (See Ten Have de Labije
and Neborsky 2005, Ten Have de Labije 2005, and Neborsky 2005 for a
detailed study of instant repression. The following material on instant
repression summarizes their articles.)
Instant Repression of the Stimulus
Suppose you ask about the stimulus: “What happened that triggered
these feelings and symptoms?” A patient who uses defenses that create
instant repression of the stimulus will respond in one of the following ways:
Denial: “Nothing happened.”
Ignoring: “We broke up, but I don’t think that’s what is bothering me.”
Making one’s head empty: “Gosh! I have no idea.”
Selective memory loss: “We went to a restaurant, but I don’t remember
anything happening there that would account for this.”
Instant Repression of the Feeling
Suppose you ask about the feeling: “What do you feel toward him for
breaking up with you that way?” A patient who uses defenses that create
instant repression of the feeling will respond in one of the following ways:
Denial: “I don’t feel anything about it.”
Ignoring: “I’m not happy about it, but it’s no big deal. After all, I
haven’t been so pleased with him myself.”
Making one’s head empty: “I don’t know what to say.” “Nothing occurs
to me.” “I’m empty.” “Maybe I don’t have any feelings.”
Selective memory loss: “I remember he said he wanted to break up, and
we talked about it. I tried to get him to rethink his position, but I
don’t remember feeling anything about it at the time.”
Motoric retardation/immobility: The patient’s body movements slow
down or stop. The patient has not declared her anger at her
boyfriend in the session, but her arms rise in frustration as she talks
about him. Then her arms suddenly drop and remain immobile on
her lap. Immobilization instantly represses the impulse.
Each of these defenses prevents the patient from seeing the stimulus or
feeling or how she experiences her feeling. As a result, she cannot
recognize the triangle of conflict or causality. To establish an intrapsychic
perspective, help her see the stimulus, feeling, anxiety, defense, and
causality. The defenses that create instant repression prevent the patient
from becoming aware and attentive to her inner life. Thus, the therapist
must help her see and let go of her defenses, which create instant repression
before exploratory therapy will be possible.
Ten Have de Labije and Neborsky (2005) outline how to awaken the
patient’s observing capacities:
1. Explore current situations in which the patient experiences her
problems. When doing so, the patient will use defenses.
2. Each time, identify the defense and help the patient see its function,
and then continue to explore the current situation.
3. Each time the patient uses this defense in the therapeutic
relationship identify the defense, help the patient see its impact on
the therapy, and then continue to explore the current situation.
4. Once the patient can see the defense, which interferes with her
ability to see the stimulus, encourage her to picture the stimulus in
detail (what the other person did or said that triggered her feelings).
5. When the patient pictures what that person did, she will have a
feeling for a split second and then instantly repress it. Intervene
immediately to help the patient notice her split-second experience of
the feeling, and then differentiate that feeling from her anxiety, and
differentiate the feeling from the defense in this moment that creates
the instant repression.
6. When the patient uses instant repression, do steps 2, 3, 4, and 5
again until she can describe the stimuli that triggered her feelings,
can bear her feelings for longer periods of time before she uses her
defenses, can distinguish her feelings from anxiety and defense, and
can see causality (feeling triggers anxiety, which evokes defenses,
which cause her presenting problems). Then go to the next step.
7. Invite the patient to label her feeling correctly and give words to
what the feeling is about. This will mobilize complex transference
feelings and defenses.
8. Encourage the patient to turn against her defenses so she can face
her feeling and get to the bottom of her difficulties. Help her see
how her defenses perpetuate her suffering and prevent her from
forming a healing therapeutic alliance. As she turns against her
defenses, she will experience, explore, and understand her complex
feelings.
Instant repression can be hard to recognize. When a patient says she
“feels nothing,” the therapist might view this as a fact: “She feels nothing.”
Research shows we feel all the time, but defenses limit self-awareness by
distracting our attention away from our feelings. When a patient denies,
ignores, or forgets her feeling, empties her head, or immobilizes herself, the
result will be “I don’t feel anything,” “Nothing occurs to me,” “I’m empty,”
or “I don’t remember feeling anything.” The statement “I don’t have a
feeling” means “Defenses keep me from knowing what I feel.” Therefore,
assess which defenses she uses.
Identifying the Defenses That Create Instant Repression
This vignette will show how to assess the defenses the patient uses that
prevent him from being aware of his anxiety. The patient describes a
situation where he was angry with his girlfriend.
Th: Are you aware of feeling anxious?
Pt: No. [Defense: denial. The patient is tense head to toe and looks
terrified.]
Th: Do you notice tension in your shoulders?
Pt: Yes.
Th: That’s a sign of anxiety. [Continue to point out symptoms of anxiety
in the patient’s body for a minute.]
Pt: I’m like this most of the time, but it’s no big deal. [Defense:
ignoring.]
Th: So you ignore your anxiety most of the time. [Identify the defense.]
Pt: There’s no sense making a big deal of it. [Defense: rationalizes
using the defense of ignoring.]
Th: Now you try to justify ignoring your anxiety. [Identify the defense.]
But if we ignore your anxiety, it will get worse. Shall we pay
attention to your anxiety? [Invite the patient to let go of the defense
of ignoring.]
Pt: I have no idea. [Defense: empties his head.]
Th: We’ve got a problem here. A part of you wants to get to the bottom
of this anxiety and find out what’s been driving this terrible anxiety.
[Healthy wish.] Another part of you doesn’t want to look at this,
wants to tune out, and is dominating our work right now. [Point out
the conflict.]
Pt: What do you mean? [Does not see how emptying his mind blocks the
therapeutic task.]
Th: You want to get to the bottom of the anxiety, right?
Pt: That’s why I’m here.
Th: We can ignore your anxiety, or we can face it and find out what is
driving this anxiety. But when I ask you which way you want to go,
you say you have no idea. That’s a problem. If you have no idea
what you want to do, we have no idea what to do. Do you see how
that is an obstacle? [Point out his choice: engage in the therapeutic
task or use his defenses? Point out the price of the defense.]
Pt: I want to address this anxiety. [Turns against his defense.]
Th: Where do you notice feeling this anxiety in your body?
Pt: I don’t know. [Defense: does not pay attention to his anxiety.]
Th: Of course, because you ignore your feelings and anxiety. [Not
knowing is the result of defenses.] So could we pay attention to
your body instead and help you with this crippling anxiety? [Point
out his choice: engage in defenses or the therapeutic task?]
Pt: I want to do whatever it takes to get rid of this anxiety.
Th: Is our goal the same: to rid you of these anxiety problems?
Pt: Yes.
Th: Where else do you notice feeling this anxiety and tension in your
body?
Pt: In my chest and my stomach. [Now he pays attention. Anxiety in the
striated muscles.]
Th: What’s the feeling underneath that is driving this anxiety?
Pt: [Silence.]
Th: What’s happening?
Pt: My mind wandered away. [Defense: ignoring—instant repression as
soon as we explore his feeling.]
Th: It’s great you can see that. You want to get to the bottom of these
feelings, but then you wander away as soon as we look at them.
[Outline his internal conflict.] What’s going to happen here if you
wander away from your feelings? [Help him turn against the
defense by helping him see how it will defeat his goal.]
Pt: I won’t get anywhere. [Recognizes the price of the defense.]
Th: Exactly. Why do that to yourself? We can wander away, or we can
find out what the feeling is that is driving your anxiety. [Point out
his choice: defense or therapeutic task?] What is your choice?
[Invite the patient to turn against the defense.]
Pt: I don’t want to wander. [Turns against the defense but not toward
the therapeutic task.]
Th: But what is your choice?
Pt: I want to find out what the feeling is that makes me so anxious.
[Turns toward the therapeutic task.]
The defenses of denial, ignoring, rationalizing, and emptying his head
have distracted the patient’s attention away from his feelings, so he is not
aware of them.
Intellectualization
When the patient intellectualizes, she uses thoughts to cover up feelings.
Help the patient see that thoughts are not feelings, and then help her face
her feelings instead.
Th: What was the feeling as you saw your father dying in the hospice?
Pt: I realized that it was all for the best. He was a religious man, and he
was looking forward to meeting his maker. [Defense:
intellectualization.]
Th: That tells me your thought, but it doesn’t tell me what you felt
toward him. [Point out the defense.] If you don’t cover your
feelings with thoughts, what do you feel now as you remember him
dying?
Pt: It was the fact that he would no longer be suffering from cancer.
[Defense: intellectualization.]
Th: Do you notice you offer thoughts instead of your feeling?
Obviously, there is some feeling about your father’s death, yet you
cover your feeling with all these thoughts. Do you notice how you
offer thoughts instead of your feeling? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: Now that you mention it.
Th: Can we find out who you are underneath all these thoughts? What’s
the feeling as you remember your father dying in the hospice?
Pt: I feel sad.
Isolation of Affect
The patient may be able to tell you what he feels (“I feel angry”), but
not how he experiences that feeling in his body (“I don’t feel anything in
my body”). How does that happen? The patient ignores the physical
experience of anger in his body through repressive defenses. Some regard
isolation of affect as a defense. I regard it as the result of defenses. The
question becomes, which defenses does he use to “isolate” himself from his
feeling?
Pt: I was angry when she threw my resume in the trash.
Th: How do you experience that anger toward her?
Pt: I don’t. [Defense: isolation of affect.]
Th: You know you are angry, but you don’t feel it.
Pt: Oh, I’m angry. [Nonverbally shows no signs of the feeling.]
Th: You say you are angry, but you don’t sound angry, and you don’t
look angry. [Draw attention to the patient’s defense. His nonverbal
defenses do not match his verbal statement.]
Pt: [Fidgets in chair. Sighs.] Maybe I’m not angry. [Defense:
retraction.]
Th: But you just said you are. Do you notice how you ignore your anger
as soon as you say it? [Point out the defense of ignoring.]
Pt: [Sighs.] If I don’t feel angry, maybe I’m not angry. [Defense:
denial.]
Th: But you said you are angry that she threw your resume in the trash.
How do you experience that anger now as you remember her
throwing the resume in the trash? [Encourage the patient to face his
feeling by reminding him of the stimulus.]
Pt: [A fist forms. Unconscious rise of feeling.]
Th: Do you notice that fist? How do you feel your anger right there?
Pt: I feel I’m getting hot. [Experiences his rage.]
Minimization
Some patients will admit a feeling but minimize its impact. When they
do, however, they get incorrect information about how important the feeling
was. Point out the patient’s use of minimization so she can feel her feeling
and receive the information it offers.
Th: What is the feeling toward him for throwing you out of the car?
Pt: A little peeved. [Defense: minimization.]
Th: A little peeved?
Pt: Yes.
Th: Do you notice how you minimize your feelings? He threw you out
of his car and left you stranded in the snow, and then you say you
feel a little peeved. Do you see how you water down your feelings?
[Point out the defense of minimization.]
Pt: That’s true. He did throw me out of the car.
Th: If we don’t water down your feelings, can we have an uncensored
look at them?
Pt: I was angry!
Rationalization
When rationalizing, the patient describes the reasons for his feelings
rather than the feelings themselves. Help the patient differentiate reasons
from feelings, and then help him face his feelings instead.
Th: You had a strong feeling when your employee tried to steal from
your firm.
Pt: Right because she— [“Because” signals that the patient is
beginning to rationalize.]
Th: If we don’t go to because, what is the feeling toward her? [Interrupt
the rationalization.]
Pt: If she hadn’t done it— [Defense: denial in fantasy. He relates to
what he wish had happened rather than what happened in reality.]
Th: But she did. And now you move to thoughts, but that won’t help
you. What is the feeling toward her? [Interrupt and identify the
defense, then ask for the feeling.]
Pt: I think my anger is due to her similarities to my mother. [Defense:
rationalization.]
Th: Now you try to analyze your anger. But how do you feel it
physically in your body? [Identify the defense and then ask about
the feeling.]
Pt: But it’s true. She is like my mother. [Defense: rationalization.]
Th: I’m sure it is. However, you bring this truth in to cover another
truth: your anger. If you don’t cover your anger with reasons, how
do you experience this anger toward your employee?
Pt: How can I feel angry when the company has already punished her?
[Defense: rationalization.]
Th: That’s not your anger. That’s how you explain it away and
rationalize it away, but these explanations do not tell us how you
experience your anger. [Point out the defense.]
Pt: I’m just trying to explain to you why I felt what I felt. [Defense:
rationalization.]
Th: Rather than tell me how you experience your feeling physically in
your body, you tell me all the reasons why you feel your anger and
why you shouldn’t. Still, we don’t know how you experience this
anger physically in your body. How do you experience this anger
physically in your body? [Point out the defense and invite the
feeling.]
Pt: [Sighs. Pounds his fist on the chair.] I tell you I think it’s because—
[Rise of feeling (fist) followed by rationalization.]
Th: If we don’t go off to because, how do you experience this anger
right now in your fist? [Block the defense and invite the feeling.]
Pt: [Looks at his fist.] My fists are tense.
Patients use because to rationalize. Point out that reasons are not
feelings.
Reaction Formation
Reaction formation is acting the opposite of what one feels. Help the
patient see and let go of this defense, and then invite her to face her wardedoff feeling.
Th: Your boyfriend slapped you and called you names. What do you
feel toward him for doing that?
Pt: I understand why he did that. He had a bad relationship with his
mother. So I decided to pay for his mortgage. [Defense: reaction
formation. She acts the opposite of an adaptive feeling.]
Th: That’s your understanding, but what’s the feeling toward him for
slapping you and calling you names? [Point out the defense.]
Pt: At the time I was angry.
Th: Rather than feel your anger, you acted the opposite instead. [Point
out the defense of reaction formation.]
Pt: What do you mean?
Th: Rather than feel your anger toward him, you covered it up with
understanding. Then you acted the opposite of your anger. An
angry woman doesn’t go out and pay his mortgage. [Point out the
defense of reaction formation.]
Pt: You’ve got a point there.
Th: If we don’t act the opposite of your anger, can we have an honest
look at this anger?
Suppression
Suppression involves the conscious avoidance of a feeling. Help the
patient see and let go of the defense so she can face the feeling she has been
avoiding.
Pt: It’s painful that he has just left me for another woman, but I just try
not to think about it. Eventually, I just forget about it. [Defense:
suppression.]
Th: I hear that, but if forgetting your feelings worked, would you be
here? [Point out the price of the defense.]
Pt: [Smiles.] No.
Th: No matter where you go, there you are. Your feelings are inside you.
It’s important we notice that when you forget your feelings and
refuse to think about them, you treat yourself like your husband has
treated you. Why do his dirty work? Why walk away from your
feelings like he did to you? [Point out how suppression is a way to
ignore herself like her husband ignored her; it’s a form of selfneglect.]
Pt: [Tears.]
SUMMARY
Moderately and highly resistant patients use repressive and tactical
defenses. Repressive defenses push feelings out of awareness. Tactical
defenses push the therapist away.
Principle: Address repressive defenses by focusing on how the patient
avoids feelings. Address tactical defenses by focusing on how
the patient avoids closeness with the therapist.
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Davanloo, H. (2000). Management of tactical defenses in intensive shortterm dynamic psychotherapy, part I: Overview, tactical defenses of
cover words and indirect speech. In Intensive short-term dynamic
psychotherapy (pp. 111–134). New York: Wiley.
Davanloo, H. (2000). Management of tactical defenses in intensive shortterm dynamic psychotherapy, part II: Spectrum of tactical defenses. In
Intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy (pp. 135–182). New York:
Wiley.
RECOMMENDED MATERIALS
To increase your skills at defense identification and intervention, you
may want to download the audio files for defense skill-building exercises at
http://www.istdpinstitute.com/resources/20-skills-to-overcome defenses/.
These five hours of training will help you learn to identify and intervene
effectively with over twenty different defenses that prevent the
establishment of a therapeutic alliance.
T
CHAPTER FIVE
Psychodiagnosis: Co-Creating an Effective Focus
o know what to say, we need to know what is going on. To know
what is going on, we need to assess each patient’s response moment
by moment. That assessment, known as psychodiagnosis (H.
Davanloo, supervision 2002–2004), determines every intervention by the
therapist.
In theory, the therapeutic process appears simple:
You ask what internal emotional problem the patient wants help
with, and he gives you a clear answer.
You ask if he would like to explore a specific example, and he gives
you one and explores it.
You ask if he would like to take a look at his feelings, and he says he
would.
You ask, “What is your feeling toward X?” He answers you with a
feeling.
You ask, “How do you experience that anger/sadness in your body?
He tells you.
You ask, “What is the impulse with that feeling?” He tells you and
faces his feelings deeply, achieving insights along the way.
But therapy never goes this way. Why? Instead of offering a problem, a
specific example, or a feeling, the patient responds with anxiety and
defenses. Perhaps the patient claims he has no emotional problem (defense).
He describes his problem but is “unable” to come up with a specific
example of it (defense). He offers an example, but when you ask what he
feels, he says he has “no feeling” (defense). Rather than exploring his
problems and feelings (the therapeutic task), he uses the detours of anxiety
and defense.
That is not a problem but an opportunity to help the patient. If the
patient responds with anxiety that is too high, regulate his anxiety, and then
explore his feeling. If the patient responds with a defense, help him see and
let go of the defense, and then explore his feeling. When the patient goes off
to a detour, help him see it so he can return to the therapeutic task: facing
the feelings he usually avoids.
PSYCHODIAGNOSIS
Therapists sometimes become frustrated with a patient’s responses of
anxiety or defense. They want to see feelings right away. But remember: all
patients’ responses—even anxiety and defense—are good because they tell
you the problem to treat in this moment. To assess that problem and
intervene, follow these three principles:
1. Assess each patient’s response (Is it a feeling, anxiety, or a
defense?)
2. Assess the patient’s capacity for self-observation in this moment.
3. Intervene to help the patient with that specific problem.
This process of assessment we call psychodiagnosis. Diagnosis in
psychotherapy usually refers to phenomenology: assessing the patient’s
directly observable symptoms. A phenomenological diagnosis tells us what
symptoms the patient has but not what causes them or how to treat them.
For instance, suppose we had four depressed patients. Their depressions
could have been triggered by a heart surgery, a recent loss, longstanding
pathological mourning, or chronic self-attack. These patients would need
four different treatments for the same diagnosis.
Psychodiagnosis assesses the patient’s responses to discover the cause
of the symptoms (Coughlin Della Selva 2001). Moment to moment, the
therapist assesses the patient’s responses of feeling, anxiety, and defense.
Through this assessment, the therapist discovers the feelings with which the
patient struggles, the anxiety discharge pattern in the body, the defenses that
create the symptoms, and his self-observing capacity. Now the therapist
knows what feelings to focus on, how to address the anxiety, what defenses
to restructure, and which self-observing capacities to strengthen so the
patient can recover. Psychodiagnosis tells us what causes the symptoms,
what to focus on, what to treat, and how to treat—moment by moment. To
know how to analyze each patient’s response, we must first understand the
triangle of conflict.
Psychodiagnosis of the Triangle of Conflict
Whenever a stimulus occurs, we feel a reactive feeling. This triggers
anxiety. Anxiety triggers defenses. And defenses cause symptoms and
presenting problems. Feeling, anxiety, and defense together comprise the
triangle of conflict. Anytime a patient has a presenting problem or
symptom, we try to find out what triangle of conflict causes that problem or
symptom. To do that, we examine each patient response in therapy.
Each time you intervene, the patient can respond in only three ways:
Feeling (or a clear answer to your question), which deepens the
alliance.
Anxiety, which weakens the alliance.
Defense, which weakens the alliance.
If the patient responds with feeling, we can explore the feeling.
However, the patient usually responds with anxiety or defense. Now the
therapist must psychodiagnose the pathway of anxiety discharge, the
defense, and the patient’s self-observing capacity to assess the patient’s
need and intervene effectively.
Psychodiagnosis of Anxiety
Each time the patient responds to an intervention, watch the patient’s
body to assess the pathways of unconscious anxiety discharge.
Striated muscles
Smooth muscles
Cognitive/perceptual disruption
The patient’s pathway of unconscious anxiety discharge tells us his
capacity to bear feelings and his threshold of anxiety tolerance, that is,
when his anxiety shifts from the striated muscles into the smooth muscles or
cognitive/perceptual disruption. Anxiety is a good sign. It means the patient
is facing feelings he previously avoided. If we avoid conflictual feelings,
the patient’s anxiety will remain low, but he will not learn to face the
feelings and issues he usually avoids. On the other hand, if his anxiety
becomes too high, the patient cannot integrate new learning and will begin
to regress. Work at the highest level of feeling the patient can bear while his
anxiety is discharged into the striated muscles.
Psychodiagnosis of Defense
To learn what causes the patient’s symptoms and presenting problems
we must identify the defenses he uses. We assess defenses to find out the
patient’s character structure, ability to observe and let go of defenses, and
capacity to bear feeling.
Character Structure
The types of defenses the patient uses correlate with character structure.
Moderately resistant patients use repressive and tactical defenses. Highly
resistant patients use tactical, repressive, and character defenses, as well as
the transference resistance (a pathological relationship enacted to keep the
therapist at a distance). Fragile, depressed, and somatizing patients use
repressive, character, and regressive defenses. The following list shows the
types of defenses that fall under each category. Later in the book you will
learn the psychodiagnostic implications those defenses have for choice of
treatment.
Nonverbal tactical defenses: Laughter, mimicry, dismissive sighing,
bodily posture (such as crossed legs and arms), avoidance of eye
contact, and gestures
Verbal tactical defenses: Vagueness, generalization, cover words,
arguing, forgetting, minimizing, rumination, hypothetical speech,
evasiveness, rambling, indecision, and racing speech
Repressive defenses: Isolation of affect, denial, repression, negation,
intellectualization, rationalization, slowing down, and reaction
formation
Regressive defenses: Helplessness, passivity, weepiness, compliance,
somatization, turning on the self, depression, projection, splitting,
externalization, dissociation, hallucinations, and delusions
Character defenses: Ignoring, neglecting, forgetting, dismissal of
oneself as the patient was dismissed by others in the past
Transference resistance: Enacting of a past relationship to resist
experiencing feelings toward the therapist
Ability to Observe and Let Go of Defenses
With the therapist’s help, moderately resistant patients can usually see
their defenses and let go of them fairly quickly. Highly resistant patients do
not see their defenses, mistakenly believing their defenses are who they are
as people. These patients require much help to see and let go of their
defenses to face their feelings. Fragile, depressed, and somatizing patients
do not see their character and regressive defenses. Regressive defenses lead
to a loss in reality testing, and some patients cannot differentiate the
therapist from a projection. These patients need to let go of their regressive
defenses to establish an intrapsychic focus in therapy. Then they will see
that defenses, not other people, create their symptoms.
Capacity to Bear Feelings
Moderately and highly resistant patients can bear high levels of feeling
because their anxiety is discharged into the striated muscles. Fragile,
depressed, and somatizing patients can bear only low levels of feeling
before their anxiety shifts into the smooth muscles or cognitive/perceptual
disruption. Some can bear only low levels of feeling and conflict before
they try to get rid of their feelings through regressive defenses such as
projection and externalization.
The Psychodiagnosis of Self-Observing Capacity
To feel her feelings deeply, a patient must be able to observe and pay
attention to them. To regulate her anxiety, a patient must be able to observe
and pay attention to it. To see and turn against her defenses, a patient must
be able to observe and pay attention to them and the suffering they cause.
The patient must be able to observe and pay attention to feelings, anxiety,
and defenses moment by moment to get well. The following is a list of the
self-observing capacities we need to mobilize in patients in the following
order:
Ability to observe
• Feelings
• Unconscious anxiety in the body
• Defenses
• The difference between the observing ego and experiencing self
• The difference between other people and projections
Ability to pay attention to
• Feelings
• Anxiety
• Defenses
• The relations among feeling, anxiety, and defenses
• The therapeutic relationship
Ability to differentiate
• Stimuli from feelings
• Feelings from anxiety
• Feelings from defenses
Ability to see causality
• Process in which a stimulus triggers a feeling, the feeling triggers
anxiety, and anxiety triggers defenses, which create the presenting
problems
Dystonicity
• Ability to differentiate oneself from the defenses one uses
• Ability to see the price of the defenses
• Ability to experience grief/guilt over the price paid for the
defenses
ASSESSING THE PATIENT’S RESPONSE TO
INTERVENTION
After each patient response, ask yourself: “Is this a feeling, anxiety, or a
defense?” If the patient expresses a feeling, explore it. If the patient
responds with anxiety in the smooth muscles or cognitive/perceptual
disruption, regulate it, and then focus on the feeling. If the patient responds
with anxiety in the striated muscles, keep exploring feeling. If the patient
responds with a defense, help the patient see and let go of the defense, and
then invite the feeling. These are the three basic interventions. Now let us
review the sequence of assessment and intervention that guides our work.
THE CYCLE OF PSYCHODIAGNOSIS
To intervene, the therapist must know what problem the patient needs
help with in this moment. To learn this, the therapist assesses the patient’s
response to intervention. The patient’s response will be a feeling (which the
therapist will explore), excessive anxiety (which the therapist will regulate
so they can explore the patient’s feeling), or a defense (which the therapist
will help the patient see and let go of so they can explore the patient’s
feeling). Thus, the therapist assesses each patient response to develop an
intervention
1. The patient’s response to intervention.
2. Psychodiagnosis by the therapist. Where is the patient’s response on
the triangle of conflict? Should you explore a feeling, regulate
anxiety, or address a defense? What problem of self-observation
prevents the patient from seeing a feeling, regulating anxiety, or
letting go of a defense?
3. Intervention by the therapist to address the specific
psychodiagnostic problem in this moment.
4. The patient’s response to intervention.
5. Psychodiagnosis by the therapist.
This cycle of intervention, response, assessment of the response, and
intervention determines the progression of the session.
OUTLINE OF TYPICAL DETOURS
Now we will review some of the most common responses by patients,
their psychodiagnostic implications, and interventions to address them.
Each time, help the patient regulate his anxiety and let go of his defenses so
he can face his warded-off feelings.
The patient can answer any question with a feeling, or with a detour to
anxiety or a defense. When he answers the therapist’s question or offers a
feeling, continue exploring. If he responds with a detour to anxiety or
defense, help him see the detour and return to an effective therapeutic focus.
Interventions for Detours When Asking for a Problem to Work
On
To co-create a therapeutic alliance, we need to know what problem
motivates the patient to seek therapy. Thus, we always begin by asking the
patient about the problem for which he seeks our help. Since many of our
patients have been hurt in previous relationships, they fear depending on us.
Thus, rather than offer a clear example of a problem, the patient may offer a
detour.
Intervention: “What is the problem with which you would like me to
help you?”
Response: “There are a lot of situations in which I am in conflict with
my fiancée, and I don’t know how to deal with her.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient gives a clear answer to your question.
Intervention: “Could we look at a specific example where this problem
comes up?”
Anxiety Detours
Sometimes the patient, rather than offer a presenting problem, will
present with anxiety instead. This section will show common detours to
anxiety, how to assess them, and how to intervene.
Intervention: “What is the problem with which you would like me to
help you?”
Response One: “I’m nervous.” [The patient shows muscle tension and
begins talking rapidly.]
Psychodiagnosis: The patient experiences a fast rise of anxiety in the
striated muscles and uses a regressive defense.
Intervention: Mobilize attention to the anxiety, assess it, and point out
the destructive consequences of talking over and ignoring the
anxiety.
Th: This nervousness is a sign of anxiety. I notice you are talking
rapidly over your anxiety. Do you notice that too?
Pt: [Defense: rushing speech.] I always do.
Th: When you talk over your anxiety, that’s a way to ignore it. [Identify
the defense.]
Pt: If I ignore my anxiety, it will go away. [Defense: rationalization and
denial.]
Th: But has it ever gone away? [Confront the denial.]
Pt: No.
Th: Ignoring the anxiety may make you less aware of it, but your body
is still anxious.
Pt: Yes.
Th: Ignoring your anxiety actually isn’t helping you. Could we pay
attention to your anxiety and see if we can bring it down? [Help the
patient let go of the defense.]
Response Two: “I’m feeling a pain in my stomach.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient experiences a fast rise of anxiety in the
smooth muscles.
Intervention: Stop the inquiry into the problem and mobilize attention to
the anxiety immediately to regulate it, and then invite feeling. “You
are aware of pain in your stomach. That’s a sign of anxiety. Are you
aware of feeling anxious right now? What else do you notice in
your body right now that is a sign of anxiety?” [Go through the
complete list of symptoms to assess her pathways of unconscious
anxiety discharge.]
Intervention: Once the patient can observe her symptoms of anxiety,
regulate it by promoting higher-level defenses, such as isolation of
affect and intellectualization. “You have come here of your own
free will to tell me about your problem. You want help; this makes
you anxious, and the anxiety goes to your gut. Do you see that
sequence?” [Once anxiety is no longer in the smooth muscles and is
in the striated muscles instead, ask about her feeling again.]
Response Three: “I’m sorry. What did you say?”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient exhibits no tension anywhere in her body.
Assessment reveals that she is experiencing cognitive/perceptual
disruption; she is unable to think or remember what you said.
Intervention: Regulate the anxiety immediately by mobilizing attention
to the experience of anxiety. “Before we get into that, how is your
thinking right now? Is it a little cloudy? Are you feeling a little
confused? How is your vision? Are your ears ringing? Okay. I
noticed that as soon as I asked what you would like me to help you
with, your anxiety went straight up, and your mind blanked out.
Did you notice that? How is your thinking now? [Talk about the
triangle of conflict and mobilize attention to the body until the
symptoms of cognitive/perceptual disruption disappear.] “Is this
problem of anxiety and your mind blanking out something you
would like me to help you with?”
Defense Detours
Sometimes the patient, rather than offer a presenting problem, will
present with a defense instead. This section will show common detours to
defense, how to assess them, and how to intervene.
Intervention: “What is the problem with which you would like me to
help you?”
Response One: “Let me first tell you my history.”
Psychodiagnosis: Rather than answer the question directly, the patient
uses diversification as a defense. We have no agreement to do
therapy yet, so we cannot interpret the defense.
Intervention: Block the defense and restate the question. “I look forward
to hearing your history, but first, can you tell me the problem you
would like me to help you with?”
Response Two: “Probably a lot of things. I can’t think of anything
specific right now.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient uses the tactical defense of vagueness to
keep the therapist at a distance.
Intervention: Block the defense and invite the patient to declare an
internal problem. “That’s a bit vague. Could you be more specific
about the problem you would like me to help you with?”
Response Three: “I’m not sure I have a problem.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient exhibits high resistance. She denies she
has a problem rather than share one.
Intervention: Stop the inquiry. Since the patient says he has no problem,
you have no agreement to do therapy. You have no permission to
interpret. Instead, make noninterpretive interventions to address her
denial. Point out the contradiction between what she says (she has
no problem) and does (she is sitting in a therapist’s office). “And
yet I’m sure you wouldn’t come here for no reason at all” or “So
although you say you have no problem, your feet brought you here
anyway.”
Response Four: “I thought you could tell me what my problem is.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient projects her responsibility onto the
therapist and then becomes passive.
Intervention: Deactivate this projection of responsibility. “Only you can
know for sure what your problem might be.”
Response Five: “The problem is my husband and the way he handles
our money.” The patient is fidgeting.
Psychodiagnosis: The patient experiences anxiety in the striated
muscles accompanied by externalization and projection. If we agree
that her husband is the problem, we just help her blame others for
her problems. We would fail to establish an intrapsychic focus.
Intervention: Block the projection and ask for an internal focus. “Since
he’s not here, I can’t help him. So I wonder with what internal
problem you would like me to help you?”
Response Six: “I don’t know what you are looking for.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient projects her will to reveal herself onto
you: “I don’t want to reveal myself. You want that.” If no anxiety
goes into the striated muscles, cognitive/perceptual disruption is the
pathway of unconscious anxiety discharge.
Intervention: Deactivate the projection of her will to avoid a
misalliance. Remind her of her will to look inside herself, which
she has forgotten.
Th: Was it your will to come here today?
Pt: Yes.
Th: Was there a problem you wanted me to help you with?
Pt: Yes.
Th: Did you come of your own free will, or were you forced to come
here?
Pt: No one forced me.
Th: So who is looking for help? Who is actually looking for something
out of this?
Keep asking about her will until she stops projecting it onto you. Do not
explore anything until her projection drops. Then her projective anxiety will
drop and you can explore.
To regulate anxiety accompanied by projection, we must understand the
causality of anxiety: (1) rise of feeling, (2) rise of anxiety, (3) defense of
projection, and (4) projective anxiety due to fear of the projection on the
therapist. Feelings trigger anxiety, but projection perpetuates it. Only by
deactivating the projection will anxiety regulation be possible. Thus, we
need to use the following steps in this order: Step One: Deactivate the
projection until the projective anxiety drops.
Step Two: Regulate the anxiety until it returns to the striated muscles
and cognition becomes clear.
Step Three: Explore feelings in another relationship.
Response Seven: “I don’t want to talk about it because I don’t want you
to get into my stuff.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient’s anxiety is in the striated muscles, and
she uses the tactical nonverbal defense of speaking in a detached,
uninvolved tone of voice. This defense is part of a transference
resistance: “I want you to help me even though I don’t reveal
myself to you.”
Intervention: Deactivate her projection and her defiance. Point out the
therapeutic task and her choice, but leave the choice up to her. “The
good news is, it is impossible for me to get into your issues.
[Deactivate the projection.] You can reveal your emotions or
conceal them. The control is yours. So the only question is whether
you want to go into your issues and listen to yourself. [Point out the
therapeutic task.] And that is entirely under your control. If you pay
close attention to your feelings and the bodily sensations that
accompany them, those feelings will allow you to know yourself.
But only you can choose to look at your stuff.”
Focus first on how she relates to herself before focusing on the
relationship with the therapist. To have a good therapeutic alliance, she first
must have a good relationship with herself, paying attention to her inner
life.
Interventions for Detours When Inviting a Specific Example of
the Problem
Once the patient describes the problems for which he seeks help, we ask
for a specific example of the problem. By exploring that specific example,
we can find out what the triangle of conflict is that creates the patient’s
problems and symptoms.
Intervention: “Can we take a look at a specific example?”
Response: “I asked her to marry me, but then she suddenly turned, spit
on me, and said she would never marry me. She said she found me
despicable and worthless. Then she took the ring and threw it into
the street.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient gives a clear answer. He exhibits no
resistance yet.
Anxiety Detours
When the therapist asks for a specific example of the problem, the
patient may offer a detour of anxiety that requires anxiety regulation before
exploring a specific example.
Intervention: “Can we take a look at a specific example?”
Response: “I’m getting sick to my stomach just thinking about it.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient’s anxiety is discharged in the smooth
muscles.
Intervention: The therapist must regulate the patient’s anxiety before
exploring a specific example of the problem.
Th: That’s a sign of anxiety. Are you aware of feeling anxious right
now? [Identify and label the symptom as anxiety.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: As soon as I invited you to look at a specific example of this
conflict, you became anxious, and the anxiety gave you a
stomachache. Do you see that too? [Point out causality: stimulus,
anxiety, and symptom.]
Pt: Yes. It feels scary to look at this.
Th: I’m sure it does. Would you like to face this conflict so we can help
you overcome your anxiety?
Pt: [Sighs.] Yes. I have to get rid of this anxiety. [The patient’s anxiety is
back in the striated muscles now so it is safe to resume the
exploration of a specific example of the problem.]
Th: Can we take a look at a specific example of where you and she were
in conflict?
Defense Detours
When the therapist asks for a specific example of the problem, the
patient may experience anxiety over the increased closeness and
dependency that will result. As a result, some patients offer defenses rather
than a specific example of their problem. The therapist must address those
defenses until the patient offers a specific example of the problem.
Intervention: “Can we take a look at a specific example?”
Response One: “I can’t remember one.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient uses the defense of forgetting, repression.
This tactical defense keeps the therapist at a distance.
Intervention: Point out the price of the defense to help the patient turn
against it. “If we don’t have a specific example, we won’t be able to
get a clear picture of your problem, and we won’t be able to help
you with it. So could we look at a specific example of where this
problem comes up for you?”
Response Two: “It’s more of a general problem. I can’t think of
anything specific.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient uses the tactical defense of vagueness.
Intervention: Block the defense and then invite a specific example. Ask
for a specific example until the patient presents one. “A ‘general
problem’ is vague. As long as this remains vague, we won’t get a
clear picture of your problem, and we won’t be able to help you
with it. Could we look at a specific example of where this problem
comes up for you?”
Response Three: “There are so many, I can’t think of a place to start.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient uses the tactical defense of avoidance.
Intervention: Block the defense, draw the patient’s attention to the price
of the defense, and then invite a specific example. “Notice how you
are having a hard time coming up with a specific example? That’s
going to be a problem because if we don’t have a specific example,
we won’t be able to get a clear picture of your difficulties. What
can we do about that?”
Response Four: “My fiancée likes to bring up difficult topics lots of
times.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient generalizes to avoid giving a specific
example.
Intervention: Block the defense, and then invite the patient to share a
specific example. “That is a bit general. Could we look at a specific
example in which this is a problem for you?”
Interventions for Detours When Inviting Feelings
Once the patient offers a specific example of the problem, we explore
his feelings in that example to find out the triangle of conflict that causes
his problems. However, the patient usually offers detours of anxiety and
defense, rather than describe his feeling.
Intervention: “She yelled and spit at you, called you names, and threw
the ring into the street. What is your feeling toward her for doing
that?”
Response: “I was angry.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient gives a clear answer to the question.
Intervention: Explore how the patient experiences his feeling in his
body. “How do you experience that anger right now, physically in
your body?”
Anxiety Detours
When the therapist invites the patient to label his feeling, anxiety will be
aroused. The pathway of anxiety discharge will determine the therapist’s
interventions as illustrated in the following examples.
Intervention: “She yelled and spit at you, called you names, and threw
the ring into the street. What is your feeling toward her for doing
that?”
Response One: “I feel tense.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient’s anxiety goes into the striated muscles.
Since the patient cannot distinguish his feeling from anxiety, he
cannot observe the feeling, only symptoms of anxiety.
Intervention: Differentiate anxiety from the feeling. “The tension is
your anxiety. If you don’t cover your feeling with anxiety, what is
the feeling that makes you so anxious?”
Response Two: “I feel sick to my stomach.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient’s anxiety is discharged into the smooth
muscles. Since the patient cannot distinguish his feeling from
anxiety, he is unable to observe the feeling, only symptoms of
anxiety.
Intervention: Regulate the anxiety by mobilizing self-observation, and
then point out causality. “Where do you notice that symptom in
your stomach? Do you notice any other symptoms of anxiety in
your body right now? So we notice that when I asked about your
feeling, you became anxious and then got sick to your stomach.”
Differentiate his feeling from anxiety and point out causality: “As you
looked at your feeling toward Melanie, this anxiety comes in and attacks
your gut. Do you see that?”
After drawing the patient’s attention to causality, you can also regulate
the anxiety by switching the focus to the patient’s feeling in another
relationship. “Does anxiety attack you as soon as you face your anger in
other relationships? Could we look at an example?”
Defense Detours
When the therapist invites the patient to label his feeling, anxiety and
defenses are triggered. Thus, the therapist must identify, point out, and help
the patient see the defenses he uses. Once the patient sees the defenses he
uses, he can make a different choice and face the feelings he has previously
avoided.
Intervention: “She yelled and spit at you, called you names, and threw
the ring into the street. What is your feeling toward her for doing
that?”
Response One: “I feel hurt.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient confuses his feeling with what the other
person did (the stimulus). That is why he cannot see his feeling of
anger.
Intervention: Help the patient differentiate the stimulus from the feeling.
“Absolutely! She hurt you! [Point out the stimulus.] That’s what
she did. What is your feeling toward her for doing that?”
[Differentiate the stimulus from the feeling.]
Response Two: “I feel sad.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient cannot distinguish his feeling from a
defensive affect. That is, sadness comes in to cover his anger. If
someone has hurt the patient, the patient will feel sad. But what
function does the sadness serve now? Does sadness mobilize or
paralyze the patient? Does his sadness help him face or avoid his
complex emotions? Here, the patient’s sadness has a defensive
function. It covers his anger.
Intervention: Differentiate the feeling from a defensive affect. “Right.
You feel sadness. This sadness is between you and you, but I’m
asking you something different: what is the feeling toward her for
hurting you?”
Response Three: “I think she was wrong to do that.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient does not distinguish his feeling from the
defense of intellectualization.
Intervention: Help the patient distinguish between the feeling and the
defense, and then invite the feeling. “That’s your thought, but your
thought is not the same as a feeling. If you don’t cover it with a
thought, what’s your feeling toward her for doing that?”
Response Four: “I wonder why she did that?”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient does not distinguish his feeling from the
defense of rumination.
Intervention: Help the patient distinguish between his feeling and the
defense, and then invite the feeling. “We can only speculate about
why she did it, but we could get absolutely clear about how you
feel. What’s the feeling toward her for doing that?”
Response Five: “I was so stupid to trust her.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient uses the defense of self-attack. Address
this defense immediately. Otherwise, his self-attack will make him
depressed in the session.
Intervention for a depressed patient with low observing capacity: Help
the patient see the defense of self-attack. “Let’s pause for a moment
and look at what happened here. I asked you what you feel toward
her, and instead, this critical system in your mind began to criticize
you. Do you see that? So that criticism must be doing a number on
you. As soon as you pay attention to your feeling, it’s like this critic
comes into the room to interrupt you. Does that make sense?”
Continue until the patient sees the difference between his feeling and the
defense of self-attack. The defense of self-attack must become
dystonic before he can fully access his rage.
Response Six: [Sighs.] “I feel confused.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient’s anxiety goes into the striated muscles,
so this is a repressive defense.
Intervention: Differentiate the feeling from the defense. “Confusion is a
thought. If we don’t cover the feeling with a thought, what’s the
feeling toward her?”
Response Seven: [The patient’s body goes limp.] “What did you say? I
feel confused.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient’s anxiety is discharged into
cognitive/perceptual disruption. The patient’s anxiety has become
too high.
Intervention: Regulate the anxiety and show the causality of feeling,
anxiety, and symptoms.
Th: You are confused? How is your thinking now?
Pt: Not good.
Th: Is it cloudy?
Pt: Yes.
Th: That’s a sign of anxiety. Did you just blank out?
Pt: It’s like my mind emptied.
Th: That’s another sign of anxiety. How is your vision and hearing?
Pt: My vision is a bit blurry.
Th: That’s another sign of anxiety. Are you feeling faint or dizzy?
Pt: No.
Th: When I ask about your feeling, your anxiety goes up rapidly, your
mind starts not working right, and you become confused. Do you
see that sequence?
Response Eight: [The patient sighs.] “I don’t feel anything.”
Psychodiagnosis One: The patient’s anxiety is in the striated muscles,
so this is the defense of denial.
Intervention: Identify the defense, encourage the patient to turn against
it, and then invite the feeling. “The only time you don’t have a
feeling is when you are six feet under the ground, and you’re not
dead yet. If you don’t deaden your feelings, what is the feeling
toward her?”
Psychodiagnosis Two: If the patient denied his feelings right away, this
is the defense of instant repression.
Intervention: Point out the defense. “Do you notice you said that right
away, before you even looked inside to see what you feel?” To
better understand this defense, imagine that you asked a friend if
she had any flour in her pantry and she replied, “I don’t know.” You
would be a bit perturbed because she said she didn’t know rather
than open the door to her pantry to see what was in there.
Response Nine: “I’m embarrassed. I feel so bad.”
Psychodiagnosis: Rather than describe a feeling toward his fiancée who
hurt him, the patient describes a feeling toward himself. In effect,
he “borrows” her shame (Nathanson 1992), identifying with her,
rather than face his feeling toward her. Here, shame functions as a
defensive affect to hide his anger.
Intervention: Point out the defensive function of shame. Differentiate
the patient and his feeling from the defensive affect of shame. “Do
you see how this embarrassment attacks you just when I ask you
what you feel toward her? It’s like the shame police come in to
Taser you before you tell me how you feel toward her. Do you see
that? Could we take a look at the feeling underneath, the feeling the
shame has been covering?”
Interventions for Detours When Inviting the Physical
Experience of Feeling
Once the patient has correctly labeled his feeling, ask him how he
experiences that feeling physically in his body. In response, the patient may
use detours of anxiety and defense. The following vignettes show how to
address these detours and maintain an effective therapeutic focus.
Intervention: “You felt angry with her. How do you experience this
anger physically in your body right now?”
Response: “I feel some heat coming up from my belly, and my hands
want to grab something.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient is aware of the experience of his feeling.
Intervention: Explore how he experiences that impulse physically in his
body. “If you let that heat come up through your body, what
impulse comes up with that rage?”
Anxiety Detours
Rather than describe how he experiences the anger in his body, the
patient may report the experience of anxiety instead. The therapist must
differentiate the patient’s feeling from anxiety, regulate the anxiety if it is
too high, and then invite the patient to face the feeling that triggered his
anxiety.
Intervention: “You felt angry with her. How do you experience this
anger physically in your body right now?”
Response: [Sighs.] “I feel fear.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient fails to differentiate his anger from his
anxiety, which is discharged into the striated muscles.
Intervention: Differentiate the anxiety from the feeling, and encourage
the patient to face his anger. “That’s your anxiety, but fear is not
your anger. If we don’t cover this anger with fear, can we have an
uncensored look at how you experience this anger in your body?”
Defense Detours
Rather than describe how he experiences his anger physically in his
body, the patient may use defenses. The therapist must help the patient see
and let go of his defenses so he can face the warded-off feeling.
Intervention: “You felt angry with her. How do you experience this
anger physically in your body right now?”
Response: “I feel like walking away from her.”
Psychodiagnosis: The patient does not differentiate his feeling of anger
from his defense against it. He wants to walk away from her and his
feelings.
Intervention: Differentiate the feeling from the defense and then invite
the feeling. “You want to walk away from her and your anger. If
you don’t walk away from your anger, how do you experience this
anger toward her?”
PSYCHODIAGNOSIS: PHASE OF INQUIRY
Tables 5.1 through 5.3 show how different patient groups respond at
each phase of developing a therapeutic alliance (declaring an internal
problem, offering a specific example, and declaring a feeling). These
different responses (access to feeling, pathway of anxiety discharge, and
types of defense) allow the therapist to psychodiagnose the patient’s
character structure (low, moderate, or high resistance; or fragile spectrum).
Table 5.1 Declaring a problem
“What is the problem with which you would like me to help you?”
Table 5.2 Phase of inviting a specific example
“Can we look at a specific example?”
Table 5.3 Phase of inviting feeling
Therapist’s intervention: “What’s the feeling toward her?”
SUMMARY
Each patient’s response to intervention will be a feeling, anxiety, or a
defense. Psychodiagnosis allows us to assess the patient’s responses so we
can offer targeted interventions moment by moment. Next, we will take the
concepts of feeling, anxiety, defense, and psychodiagnosis and show you
different ways to co-create a therapeutic alliance with a broad range of
patients.
Principle: Assess each patient response, so your intervention will
address the patient’s need in this moment.
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Frederickson, J. (1999). Theory of the analysis of conflict and conflict
analysis studies. In Psychodynamic psychotherapy: Learning to listen
from multiple perspectives (pp. 51–110). New York: Taylor and Francis.
These readings will help you listen to a session in terms of the triangle
of conflict.
Frederickson, J. (2012). Maintaining an effective focus on feeling.
http://www.istdpinstitute.com/Maintaininganeffectivefocus/. This is a
private download only for purchasers of this book.
RECOMMENDED MATERIALS
For three videos on psychodiagnosis presented by Jon Frederickson, you
can visit the URLs below.
Intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy part 1 (October 5, 2011).
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cKzmk2-xnzY.
Intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy part 2 (October 5, 2011).
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dK2x906ptWA.
Intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy part 3 (January 18, 2012).
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sDmVgoKPVkw.
T
CHAPTER SIX
Inquiry: Co-Creating a Conscious Therapeutic
Alliance
he first task in therapy is to co-create a relationship for change.
Sometimes people assume one exists if the patient shows up for
therapy and says what comes to mind and the therapist listens. Yet
none of these elements constitutes a therapeutic alliance. Let us clarify the
task and the purpose of psychotherapy. The term psychotherapy derives
from a Greek word meaning “healing of the soul (psyche) within the person
(intrapsyche).” Hence, focusing inside oneself is the intrapsychic
perspective. A psychodynamic therapy tries to cure psychological
symptoms resulting from the dynamic conflict among the feelings, anxiety,
and defenses within a person.
To establish this internal focus, the therapist asks about the problems
and symptoms for which the patient seeks help. Next, the therapist asks for
a specific example of where those problems occur. By exploring that
example, the therapist and patient discover the conflicts at work in her life.
Now the therapist helps the patient engage in the therapeutic task: let go of
her defenses, face her fears, and experience the feelings she has avoided. As
she does so, the patient experiences a rise in emotions and memories, so she
can experience the unconscious forces driving her suffering. These
experiential insights lead to long-lasting change.
To co-create a therapeutic alliance, we mobilize ingredients in a specific
order.
1. Establish an internal emotional problem to work on.
2. Establish that it is the patient’s will to work on the problem.
3. Look at a specific example of the problem to discern and get
consensus on the triangle of conflict.
4. Get consensus on the therapeutic task.
FIRST INGREDIENT: A DECLARED INTERNAL
EMOTIONAL PROBLEM
We begin by asking, “What is the problem you would like me to help
you with?” Choose your wording carefully to show that therapy focuses on
her problem, not someone else’s.
Th: What’s the problem you would like me to help you with?
Pt: I’ve been feeling depressed ever since my fiancé broke up with me
two months ago. [Clear declaration of an internal problem.]
The therapist assesses the severity of the patient’s symptoms, vegetative
signs, and previous depressive episodes. The depression was not severe,
there were no vegetative signs, and she had no previous episodes. He
continues with the inquiry.
Th: One problem you would like me to help you with is your
depression. Are there any other problems you would like me to help
you with?
Pt: I think I have a problem in relationships because I didn’t see this
coming at all. I was shocked that my fiancé broke off the
engagement. He said we had problems in our relationship, but I just
wrote that off as a little anxiety. I don’t know what I was missing.
Th: It sounds like you just told us what you were missing. He felt you
had problems in your relationship, but when you wrote it off as
anxiety, you missed the importance of what he was saying. He told
you. You wrote it off. Then you suffered the consequences. Does
that fit? [Point out how her defenses of denial and ignoring blinded
her—the cost.]
Pt: I hate to say it, but, yes, that does fit. I hadn’t seen that before.
Th: Seen what?
Pt: That when I ignored a problem, it happened anyway, and I paid the
price.
Th: It sounds like ignoring him might have alleviated your anxiety in
the short term, but it set you up horribly for this breakup. [The price
of the defense.]
Pt: Right.
Th: You want me to help you with this depression. Would you like me
to help you deal better with the feelings in your relationships so
your denial doesn’t set you up for another heartbreak? [Get
consensus on the presenting problems for which she seeks help.]
Pt: Yes.
SECOND INGREDIENT: THE PATIENT’S WILL TO DO
THERAPY
Once the patient declares an internal emotional problem, ask if it is her
will to seek therapy. Often, patients have been referred against their will or
under a threat by a spouse, boss, or even court authorities. We have no right
to do therapy without the patient’s desire and permission. If the patient
expresses verbally or nonverbally any reluctance in the opening minutes,
ask, “Is it your will to be here?” “Did you come here of your own free
will?” “Are you required to come here, or was this your decision?”
If a patient does not declare an internal emotional problem or her will to
do therapy, you have no right to work with her. If she does not want to do
therapy, do not explore further. Instead, find out what prevents her from
seeking help to achieve her goals for her benefit.
THIRD INGREDIENT: CONSENSUS ON THE
INTRAPSYCHIC CONFLICT
Once the patient declares an internal problem and her desire for the
therapist’s help, ask, “Can we look at a specific example of where this
problem occurs?” The problem the patient declares motivates her to seek
help. Patients never say, “Give me deeper insight into my intrapsychic
conflicts.” They come because they suffer. If you can show a patient how
her defenses create her suffering, she will let go of them and engage in the
therapeutic task. Explore a specific example of her problem to find out
which defenses create her symptoms and presenting problems.
Explore that specific example by asking, “What is the feeling toward
him?” The patient will respond in one of three ways: a feeling, anxiety, or a
defense. Moment by moment, help the patient pay attention to these
reactions. When the patient can see the feelings, anxiety, and defenses
operating in the session, she will understand the conflict causing her
problems.
Th: I notice when we talk about your anger, you get a little vague and
criticize yourself instead. Do you notice that too? [Point out the
triangle of feeling, anxiety, and defense.]
Pt: Now that you point it out, yes.
Th: I wonder if that happened with your boyfriend too. You mention
you were angry with him, but you became vague rather than reveal
your feelings directly. Then you blamed yourself rather than hold
him responsible for his outburst when visiting your parents. Do you
think this tendency to blame yourself and turn the anger on yourself
might be making you depressed? [Link the conflicts in therapy and
other relationships. Show how her defenses create her presenting
problems.]
Pt: I hadn’t seen that connection before, but yes, that makes sense.
With consensus on the intrapsychic conflict causing her difficulties, we
can take the next step.
FOURTH INGREDIENT: CONSENSUS ON THE
THERAPEUTIC TASK
In relationships, the patient’s feeling triggers anxiety and defenses that
create her presenting problems and symptoms. So the patient must (1) turn
against the defenses that create her presenting problems and symptoms, (2)
face what she fears rather than avoid it, and (3) feel her feelings as deeply
as possible. By doing so, she will learn to experience her feelings and
channel them into adaptive actions, not into maladaptive defenses and
symptoms.
Th: There’s a conflict here. When you feel angry in relationships, you
become vague and turn the anger on yourself, which makes you
depressed. When you don’t express your feelings or concerns, you
become more distant and lose the emotional closeness you want. Is
that a fair summary? [Get consensus on the internal conflict.]
Pt: Yes, that makes sense.
Th: If you like, our task here would be to help you turn against these
mechanisms of self-blame and turning anger on yourself because
they make you depressed. Does that fit? [Get agreement on the
therapeutic task.]
Pt: Yes.
Th: And once we turn against those mechanisms, our task is to face this
anger, get to the bottom of your feelings, and find out what has
been driving this pattern of self-punishment. Is that something you
would like to do?
Pt: Yes, but I’m afraid of my anger. [Obstacle to engaging in therapy.
Point out the patient’s choice and mobilize her will to the task.]
Th: Of course, you are. Otherwise, you wouldn’t be here, but if you
continue to avoid your anger, what will be the result? [Help her see
the price of the defense.]
Pt: I’ll probably just stay the same. [She begins to see how her defense
creates her symptoms.]
Th: Do you want your fear of anger to be in control, or would you like
to master your fear so you are in control? [Mobilize her awareness
of her positive goal.]
Pt: I’d like to master my fear, but I don’t know how. [We must clarify
the therapeutic task.]
Th: We have two choices. You can avoid your anger and remain anxious
and out of control. [Unhealthy choice based on maladaptive
defenses.] Or together, we could face this anger and feel it as deeply
as possible so you can feel powerful and in charge rather than
anxious and out of control. [The therapeutic task.] Instead of
turning the anger onto yourself, you could channel it into healthy
assertion. Instead of being vague, you could be clear about what
you want. Instead of criticizing yourself, you could have a healthy
sense of self-esteem. And instead of hiding your feelings, you could
express them and have more emotionally intimate relationships.
[Results of the defenses versus the therapeutic alliance.] What
choice would you like us to make today? Shall we avoid this anger,
or would you like to overcome this fear so you can be in charge?
[Point out the choice and invite the patient to declare her choice.]
Pt: When you put it that way, I’d be silly not to try to look at my anger.
[“When you put it that way” is a possible indication of projection.
She does not entirely own that this is her desire.]
Th: But is that what you want for yourself, for your goals, for your
purposes? [The therapeutic task is not designed to achieve the
therapist’s but the patient’s goals.]
Pt: Yes, that’s what I want. [Now she wants us to explore her feelings
and conflicts together.]
Defenses defeat her goals. The therapeutic task will help her achieve
them. Remind the patient of her goals so she can see when she is on or off
task. Experiencing and sharing feelings allows us to build emotionally
secure relationships. In contrast, defenses ward off feelings, creating
insecure attachments. Defenses cheat us of the intimacy we long for. Out of
compassion, the therapist interrupts and blocks defenses so patients can
share their feelings and co-create a relationship for change.
THE THERAPEUTIC TASK
Dag HammarskjÖld, secretary-general of the United Nations, once said,
“Life only demands from you the strength that you possess. Only one feat is
possible: not to run away.” And the therapeutic task is to help the patient
not run away from his feelings that make him anxious.
Yet if we do not spell out the task, the patient does not know what to do
in therapy: “I’m here. I’m talking. I’m telling you what is happening in my
life. Why am I not getting better?” No psychotherapy can succeed with
those ingredients alone. Passivity does not work. The patient must
demonstrate some emotional courage by (1) letting go of defenses, (2)
facing what she fears, and (3) experiencing her feelings. Talking, logging
hours, and showing up are not enough.
A patient usually suffers from relationship problems because her
defenses prevent emotional closeness. If she adopts a passive, defiant, or
uninvolved stance in other relationships, she will do so in therapy as well.
However, that kind of behavior results in failure. Remind her of her goals.
Help her see defenses and relational patterns that sabotage her goals. Then
invite her to let go of self-defeating defenses, and face what she has
previously avoided so she can achieve her goals.
First, offer an invitation to the therapeutic task. “I’m going to invite you
to pay careful attention to the feelings in your body, any anxiety you feel in
your body, and any shifts in our connection so we can understand what is
going on underneath to create these problems that are bothering you. Does
that sound like something you would be willing to do?”
Next, mobilize the patient’s will to face what she fears.
Pt: I’m afraid of those feelings.
Th: Of course, but our task here is to face what you are afraid of so you
can master your anxiety rather than remain its slave. As long as you
avoid these feelings, you’ll have symptoms instead. Why do that to
yourself? You can run away from your feelings and have the same
problems, or we can face those feelings and help you become free
of these symptoms. What would you like us to do?
Next, mobilize the patient’s will to pay attention to her anxiety. “If you
ignore your anxiety, it just builds, and then you end up suffering from these
terrible stomach cramps and anxiety. If you ignore your anxiety, the therapy
will be a painful experience for you, and I don’t want that to happen. Could
we pay careful attention to your anxiety so we can get rid of these
symptoms and find out what is causing them? Does that make sense to
you?”
Finally, mobilize the patient’s will to turn against the defenses and face
her feelings.
Pt: I don’t want to take a look at those feelings. [Defense.]
Th: That’s going to be a problem.
Pt: How come? I never look at those feelings.
Th: Of course, but has that been working? You’ve been avoiding your
grief over the loss of your husband. You became depressed, and this
has been going on for how many years?
Pt: Five.
Th: By avoiding the grief, you have become depressed instead [price of
the defense]. You don’t have to face this grief if you don’t want to.
After all, no one can make you. But as long as you don’t, your
depression will continue and the therapy will fail [price of the
defense]. You can avoid this grief and continue to suffer
[antitherapeutic task], or we can face these feelings and get rid of
this depression [therapeutic task]. What shall we do?
The following list outlines the purposes of the therapeutic task:
Understanding: Together the patient and therapist pay attention
moment to moment to observe the sequence of feelings, anxiety, and
defenses creating the patient’s difficulties.
Anxiety regulation: The patient and therapist must pay attention
moment to moment to decrease the patient’s anxiety and discover
what feelings trigger it. This close, mutual attention regulates the
patient’s anxiety, providing a background of dyadic affect regulation
(Schore 1994, 2002). This regulates her body and restores her
cognitive functioning: the preconditions for an effective treatment.
Secure attachment: The patient who uses defenses to ignore her inner
experience invites the therapist to do the same, thereby creating an
insecure attachment. The therapist blocks the patient’s defenses and
encourages mutual attention to feelings, anxiety, and defenses to
establish a secure autonomous attachment.
Achievement of a positive goal: Psychotherapy tries to help the
patient achieve her healthy goals. Since defenses sabotage her goals,
creating her difficulties, the therapist encourages the patient to let go
of her defenses so she can get what she wants.
INGREDIENTS FOR A CONSCIOUS THERAPEUTIC
ALLIANCE
The therapist and patient must cr