Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025 OSCILLATORY STATE-SPACE

MODELS

T. Konstantin Rusch
MIT
tkrusch@mit.edu

Daniela Rus
MIT

ABSTRACT

We propose Linear Oscillatory State-Space models (LinOSS) for efficiently learn-
ing on long sequences. Inspired by cortical dynamics of biological neural net-
works, we base our proposed LinOSS model on a system of forced harmonic os-
cillators. A stable discretization, integrated over time using fast associative paral-
lel scans, yields the proposed state-space model. We prove that LinOSS produces

stable dynamics only requiring nonnegative diagonal state matrix. This is in stark

contrast to many previous state-space models relying heavily on restrictive param-
eterizations. Moreover, we rigorously show that LinOSS is universal, i.e., it can

approximate any continuous and causal operator mapping between time-varying

functions, to desired accuracy. In addition, we show that an implicit-explicit dis-
cretization of LinOSS perfectly conserves the symmetry of time reversibility of

the underlying dynamics. Together, these properties enable efficient modeling of

long-range interactions, while ensuring stable and accurate long-horizon forecast-
ing. Finally, our empirical results, spanning a wide range of time-series tasks from

mid-range to very long-range classification and regression, as well as long-horizon

forecasting, demonstrate that our proposed LinOSS model consistently outper-
forms state-of-the-art sequence models. Notably, LinOSS outperforms Mamba

and LRU by nearly 2x on a sequence modeling task with sequences of length 50k.
Code: https://github.com/tk-rusch/linoss
.

1 INTRODUCTION
State-space models (Gu et al., 2021; Hasani et al., 2022; Smith et al., 2023; Orvieto et al., 2023) have

recently emerged as a powerful tool for learning on long sequences. These models posses the state-
fullness and fast inference capabilities of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) together with many of

the benefits of Transformers (Vaswani, 2017; Devlin, 2018), such as efficient training and competi-
tive performance on large-scale language and image modeling tasks. For these reasons, state-space

models have been successfully implemented as foundation models, surpassing Transformer-based
counterparts in several key modalities, including language, audio, and genomics (Gu & Dao, 2023).
Originally, state-space models have been introduced to modern sequence modelling by leveraging
specific structures of the state matrix, i.e., normal plus low-rank HiPPO matrices (Gu et al., 2020;
2021), allowing to solve linear recurrences via a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). This has since been

simplified to only requiring diagonal state matrices (Gu et al., 2022a; Smith et al., 2023; Orvi-
eto et al., 2023) while still obtaining similar or even better performance. However, due to the linear

nature of state-space models, the corresponding state matrices need to fulfill specific structural prop-
erties in order to learn long-range interactions and produce stable predictions. Consequently, these

structural requirements heavily constrain the underlying latent feature space, potentially impairing
the model’s expressive power.
In this article, we adopt a radically different approach by observing that forced harmonic oscillators,
the basis of many systems in physics, biology, and engineering, can produce stable dynamics while at
the same time seem to ensure expressive representations. Motivated by this, we propose to construct
state-space models based on stable discretizations of forced linear second-order ordinary differential
equations (ODEs) modelling oscillators. Our additional contributions are: • we introduce implicit and implicit-explicit associative parallel scans ensuring fast training
and inference.

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

• we show that our proposed state-space model yields stable dynamics and is able to learn
long-range interactions only requiring nonnegative diagonal state matrix.

• we demonstrate that a symplectic discretization of our underlying oscillatory system con-
serves its symmetry of time reversibility.

• we rigorously prove that our proposed state-space model is a universal approximator of
continuous and causal operators between time-series.
• we provide an extensive empirical evaluation of our model on a wide variety of sequential
data sets with sequence lengths reaching up to 50k. Our results demonstrate that our model
consistently outperforms or matches the performance of state-of-the-art state-space models,
including Mamba, S4, S5, and LRU.
2 THE PROPOSED STATE-SPACE MODEL
Our proposed state-space model is based on the following system of forced linear second-order
ODEs together with a linear readout,
y
′′(t) = −Ay(t) + Bu(t) + b,
x(t) = Cy(t) + Du(t),

(1)

with hidden state y(t) ∈ R

m, output state x(t) ∈ R
q
, time-dependent input signal u(t) ∈ R
p
,

weights A ∈ R

m×m, B ∈ R
m×p
, C ∈ R
q×m, D ∈ R
q×p
, and bias b ∈ R

m. Note that A is a
diagonal matrix, i.e., with non-zero entries only on its diagonal. We further introduce an auxiliary
state z(t) ∈ R

m, with z = y
′
. We can thus write (1) (omitting the bias b and linear readout x)

equivalently as,

z
′
(t) = −Ay(t) + Bu(t),
y
′
(t) = z(t).

(2)

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

time t
Input Sequence
u(t)

Output Sequence

LinOSS layer nonlinear layer LinOSS layer nonlinear layer
LinOSS block LinOSS block
y(t) z(t) y(t) z(t)

Figure 1: Schematic drawing of the proposed Linear Oscillatory State-Space model (LinOSS).
The input sequences are processed through multiple LinOSS blocks. Each block is composed of
a LinOSS layer (2) (y(t) plotted using orange solid lines and z(t) using blue dashed lines) followed
by a nonlinear transformation, specifically a Gated Linear Units (Dauphin et al., 2017) (GLU) layer

in our case. After passing through several LinOSS blocks, the latent sequences are decoded to pro-
duce the final output sequence.

2.1 MOTIVATION AND BACKGROUND
To demonstrate that the underlying ODE in (1) models a network of forced harmonic oscillators, we
begin with the scalar case by setting p = m = 1 in (1). Choosing B = b = 0, we obtain the classic

2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

ODE, y
′′ + Ay = 0, which describes simple harmonic motion with frequency A > 0, such as that
of a simple pendulum (Guckenheimer & Holmes, 1990). Now, allowing B ̸= 0 introduces external
forcing proportional to the input signal u(t), where B modulates the effect of the forcing. Finally,
setting p, m > 1 yields an uncoupled system of forced harmonic oscillators.
Neuroscience inspiration. Our approach is inspired by neurobiology, where the periodic spiking

and firing of action potentials in individual neurons can be observed and analyzed as oscillatory phe-
nomena. Furthermore, entire networks of cortical neurons exhibit behavior-dependent oscillations,

reviewed in Buzsaki & Draguhn (2004). Remarkably, despite their complexity, these neural oscil-
lations share characteristics with harmonic oscillators, as described in Winfree (1980). Building on

this insight, we distill the core essence of cortical dynamics and aim to construct a machine learn-
ing model following the motion of harmonic oscillations. Finally, we note that our focus is on the

theoretical and empirical aspects of the proposed oscillatory state-space model in this manuscript.
However, our model can be further used in the context of computational neuroscience emulating

characteristic phenomena of brain oscillations, such as frequency-varying oscillations, transient syn-
chronization or desynchronization of discharges, entrainment, phase shifts, and resonance, while at

the same time being able to learn non-trivial input-output relations.
2.2 COMPARISON WITH RELATED WORK
State-space models have seen continuous advancements since their introduction to modern sequence
modeling in Gu et al. (2021). The original S4 model (Gu et al., 2021), along with its adaptations
(Gu et al., 2022a; Nguyen et al., 2022; Goel et al., 2022), utilized FFT to solve linear recurrences.
More recently, a simplified variant, S5 (Smith et al., 2023), was introduced, which instead employs
associative parallel scans to achieve similar computational speed. Another advancement to S4 have
been Liquid Structural State-Space models (Hasani et al., 2022) which exchanged the static state
matrix with an input-dependent state transition module. While all aforementioned models rely on
the HiPPO parameterization (Gu et al., 2020), Linear Recurrent Units (LURs) (Orvieto et al., 2023)

demonstrated that even simpler parameterization yield state-of-the-art performance. Finally, selec-
tive state spaces have been introduced in Gu & Dao (2023) in order to further close the performance

gap between state-space models and Transformers utilized in foundation models.

Oscillatory dynamics as a neural computational paradigm has been originally introduced via Cou-
pled Oscillatory RNNs (CoRNNs) (Rusch & Mishra, 2021a). In this work, it has been shown that

recurrent models based on nonlinear oscillatory dynamics are able to learn long-range interactions
by mitigating the exploding and vanishing gradients problem (Pascanu, 2013). This approach was
later refined for handling very long sequences in Rusch & Mishra (2021b), which utilized uncoupled
nonlinear oscillators for fast sequence modeling by adopting a diagonal hidden-to-hidden weight
matrix. Interestingly, this method resembles modern state-space models but distinguishes itself by
employing nonlinear dynamics. Since then, this concept, generally termed as neural oscillators
(Lanthaler et al., 2024), has been extended to other areas of machine learning, e.g., Graph-Coupled
Oscillator Networks (GraphCON) (Rusch et al., 2022) for learning on graph-structured data, and
RNNs with oscillatory dynamics combined with convolutions leading to locally coupled oscillatory
RNNs (Keller & Welling, 2023). Our proposed LinOSS model differs from all these methods by its
explicit use of harmonic oscillators via a state-space model approach.
2.3 DISCRETIZATION
Our aim is to approximately solve the linear ODE system (2) as fast as possible, while at the same
time being able to guarantee stability over long time-scales. To this end, we suggest to leverage the
following two time integration schemes.
Implicit time integration. We fix a timestep 0 < ∆t ≤ 1 and define our proposed state-space
model hidden states at time tn = n∆t as the following implicit discretization of the first order
system (2):

zn = zn−1 + ∆t(−Ayn + Bun),
yn = yn−1 + ∆tzn.
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

This can be written in matrix form by introducing xn = [zn, yn]
⊤,
Mxn = xn−1 + Fn,

with

M =

I ∆tA
−∆tI I 

, Fn =

∆tBun
0

.

We can now solve our discretized oscillatory system by simply inverting matrix M and computing
the induced recurrence. Note that inverting matrices typically requires O(m3

) operations (where
m is the number of rows or columns of the matrix) using methods like Gauss-Jordan elimination,
making it computationally expensive. However, by leveraging the Schur complement, we can obtain
an explicit form of M−1

that can be computed in O(m), thanks to the diagonal structure of A. More

concretely,

M−1 =

I − ∆t
2AS −∆tAS
∆tS S 
=

S −∆tAS
∆tS S 

, (3)

with the inverse of the Schur complement S = (I + ∆t
2A)
−1 which itself is a diagonal matrix and
can thus be trivially inverted. We point out that among other choices, a straightforward condition
that ensures S is well-defined is Ak ≥ 0 for all k = 1, . . . , m. The recurrence of the proposed
model is then given as,

xn = MIMxn−1 + F
IM
n
, (4)

with MIM = M−1
, and F
IM

n = M−1Fn. As we will show in the subsequent section, this discretiza-
tion leads to a globally asymptotically stable discrete dynamical system.

Implicit-explicit time integration (IMEX). Another discretization yielding stable dynamics that,

however, do not converge exponentially fast to a steady-state can be obtained by leveraging symplec-
tic integrators. To this end, we fix again a timestep 0 < ∆t ≤ 1 and define our proposed state-space

model hidden states at time tn = n∆t as the following implicit-explicit (IMEX) discretization of
the first order system (2):

zn = zn−1 + ∆t(−Ayn−1 + Bun),
yn = yn−1 + ∆tzn.

(5)
The only difference compared to the previous fully implicit discretization is the explicit treatment
of the hidden state y (i.e., using yn−1 instead of yn) in the first equation of (5). As before, we can
simplify this system in matrix form,

xn = MIMEXxn−1 + F
IMEX
n
, (6)

with

MIMEX =

I −∆tA
∆tI I − ∆t
2A

, F
IMEX
n =

∆tBun
∆t
2Bun

.

Interestingly, ODE system (2) represents a Hamiltonian system (Arnold, 1989), with Hamiltonian,

H(y, z, t) = 1
2
Xm
k=1
Aky
2
k + z
2
k − 2
Xp
l=1
Bklu(t)l
!
yk. (7)
The numerical approximation of this system using the previously described IMEX discretization
is symplectic, i.e., it preserves a Hamiltonian close to the Hamiltonian of the continuous system.
Thus, by the well-known Liouville’s theorem (Sanz Serna & Calvo, 1994), we know that the phase
space volume of (2) as well as of its symplectic approximation (6) is preserved. This gives rise to
invertible model architectures leading to memory efficient implementations of the backpropagation
through time algorithm, similar as in (Rusch & Mishra, 2021b). This denotes the most significant
difference between the two different discretization schemes, i.e., the IMEX integration-based model
is volume preserving, while IM integration-based model introduces dissipative terms. We will see
in subsequent sections that both models have their own individual advantages depending on the

underlying data. Finally, we note that stable higher-order time integration schemes (such as higher-
order symplectic splitting schemes) can be used in this context as well. An example of leveraging

the second-order symplectic velocity Verlet method can be found in Appendix Section D.

4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

2.4 FAST RECURRENCE VIA ASSOCIATIVE PARALLEL SCANS
Parallel (or associative) scans, first introduced in Kogge & Stone (1973) and reviewed in Blelloch

(1990), offer a powerful method for drastically reducing the computational time of recurrent op-
erations. These scans have previously been employed to enhance the training and inference speed

of RNNs (Martin & Cundy, 2017; Kaul, 2020). This technique was later adapted for state-space

models in Smith et al. (2023), becoming a crucial component in the development of many state-of-
the-art sequence models, including Linear Recurrent Units (LRUs) (Orvieto et al., 2023) and Mamba

models (Gu & Dao, 2023).
A parallel scan operates on a sequence [x1, . . . , xN ] with a binary associative operation •, i.e., an
operation satisfying (x • y) • z = x • (y • z) for instances x, y, and z, to return the sequence
[x1, x1 • x2, . . . , x1 • x2 • · · · • xN ]. Under certain assumptions, this operation can be performed in
computational time proportional to ⌈log2

(N)⌉. This is in stark contrast to the computational time of
serial recurrence that is proportional to N. It is straightforward to check that the following operation
is associative:

(a1, a2) • (b1, b2) = (b1 •◦ a1, b1 •◦ a2 + b2),

where •◦, •◦ are the matrix-matrix and matrix-vector products for matrices a1, b1 and vectors a2, b2.
Note that both products can be computed in O(m) time leveraging 2 × 2 block matrices with only
diagonal entries in each block, e.g., matrices MIM and MIMEX in (4),(6). Clearly, applying a parallel
scan based on this associative operation on the input sequence [(M, F1),(M, F2), . . . ] yields an
output sequence [(M, F1),(M2

,MF1 + F2), . . . ] where the solution of the recurrent system xn =
Mxn−1 + Fn (with initial value x0 = 0) is stored in the second argument of the elements of
this sequence. Thus, we can successfully apply parallel scans to both discretizations (4)(6) of our
proposed system in order to significantly speed up computations. We refer to the application of this
parallel scan to implicit formulations as implicit parallel scans. When applied to implicit-explicit
formulations, we describe it as implicit-explicit parallel scans.

We term our proposed sequence model, which efficiently solves the underlying linear system of har-
monic oscillators (2) using fast parallel scans, as Linear Oscillatory State-Space (LinOSS) model.

To differentiate between the two discretization methods, we refer to the model derived from im-
plicit discretization as LinOSS-IM, and the model based on the implicit-explicit discretization as

LinOSS-IMEX. A schematic drawing of our proposed state-space model can be seen in Fig. 1.
Moreover, a full description of a multi-layer LinOSS model, including specific nonlinear building
blocks, can be found in Appendix A.
3 THEORETICAL INSIGHTS
3.1 STABILITY AND LEARNING LONG-RANGE INTERACTIONS
Hidden states of classical nonlinear RNNs are updated based on its previous hidden states pushed
through a parametric function followed by a (usually) bounded nonlinear activation function such as
tanh or sigmoid. This way, the hidden states are guaranteed to not blow up. However, this is not true
for linear recurrences, where specific structures of the hidden-to-hidden weight matrix can lead to
unstable dynamics. The following simple argument demonstrates that computing the eigenspectrum
(i.e., set of eigenvalues) of the hidden-to-hidden weight matrix of a linear recurrent system suffices
in order to analyse its stability properties. To this end, let us consider a general linear discrete
dynamical system with external forcing given via the recurrence xn = Mxn−1 + Bun, and initial
value x0 = 0. Assuming M is diagonalizable (if not, one can make a similar argument leveraging
the Jordan normal form), i.e., there exists matrix S such that M = SΛS−1

, where Λ is a diagonal
matrix with the eigenvalues of M on its diagonal. The dynamics of the transformed hidden state
x ̄n = S
−1xn evolve according to x ̄n = S
−1xn = S
−1Mxn−1 + S

−1Bun = Λx ̄n−1 + Bu ̄
n with

initial value x ̄0 = S

−1x0, where B ̄ = S

−1B. Unrolling the dynamics (assuming x0 = 0) yields,

x ̄1 = Bu ̄
1, x ̄2 = ΛBu ̄
1 + Bu ̄
2, ... ⇒ xn =
nX−1
k=0
Λ
kBu ̄
n−k.

Clearly, if all eigenvalues Λ have magnitude less or equal than 1 the hidden states will not blow up.
In addition to stability guarantees, eigenspectra with unit norm allow the model to learn long-range

5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

interactions (Arjovsky et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2022b; Orvieto et al., 2023) by avoiding vanishing and
exploding gradients (Pascanu, 2013). Therefore, it is sufficient to analyse the eigenspectra of our
proposed LinOSS models in order to understand their ability to generate stable dynamics and learn
long-range interactions. To this end, we have the following propositions.
Proposition 3.1. Let MIM ∈ R

m×m be the hidden-to-hidden weight matrix of the implicit model
LinOSS-IM (4). We assume that Akk ≥ 0 for all diagonal elements k = 1, . . . , m of A, and further
that ∆t > 0. Then, the complex eigenvalues of MIM are given as,
λj =
1
1 + ∆t
2Akk
+ i(−1)⌈
j
m ⌉∆t
√
Akk
1 + ∆t
2Akk
, for all j = 1, . . . , 2m,

with k = j mod m. Moreover, the spectral radius ρ(MIM) is bounded by 1, i.e., |λj | ≤ 1 for all
j = 1, . . . , 2m.
Proof.
det(MIM − λI) =

S − λI −∆tAS
∆tS S − λI
=
S − λI −∆tAS
0 S − λI + ∆t
2AS2
(S − λI)−1

=
Ym
k=1
(Skk − λ)

Skk − λ +
∆t
2AkkS
2
kk
Skk − λ

=
Ym
k=1
[(Skk − λ)
2 + ∆t
2AkkS
2
kk].

Setting k = j mod m, the eigenvalues of MIM are thus given as,

λj = Skk + i(−1)⌈
j
m ⌉∆tSkkp
Akk, for all j = 1, . . . , 2m.

In particular, assuming Akk ≥ 0 for all k = 1, . . . , m, the magnitude of the eigenvalues λj are given
as,

|λj |
2 = S
2
kk + ∆t
2S
2
kkAkk = S
2
kk(1 + ∆t
2Akk) = Skk ≤ 1,

for all j = 1, . . . , 2m, with k = j mod m.
This proof reveals important insights into our proposed LinOSS-IM model. First, the magnitude

of the eigenvalues at initialization can be controlled by either specific initialization of A, or al-
ternatively through a specific choice of the timestep parameter ∆t. Moreover, LinOSS-IM yields

asymptotically stable dynamics for any choices of positive parameters A. This denotes a significant

difference compared to previous first-order system, where the values of A (and thus its eigenval-
ues) have to be heavily constrained for the system to be stable. We argue that this flexibility in the

parameterization of our model benefits the optimizer potentially leading to better performance in
practice.

Remark 1. A straightforward adaptation of Proposition 3.1 can also be derived for the implicit-
explicit version of the model, LinOSS-IMEX (6). The detailed proposition is given in Appendix

Proposition E.1. In particular, the analysis shows that all eigenvalues λj of MIMEX in (6) satisfy

|λj | = 1. This result underscores the key distinction between the two models: LinOSS-IM incor-
porates dissipative terms, whereas LinOSS-IMEX denotes a conservative system. Following the

argument at the beginning of Section 3.1, one can interpret the dissipative terms in LinOSS-IM
as forgetting mechanisms, which are considered crucial for expressive modeling of long sequences.
This makes LinOSS-IM a more flexible model version compared to LinOSS-IMEX. Finally, we note
that explicit discretization schemes lead to exploding hidden states returning NaN output values in
practice during training. For this reason, we focus solely on stable methods in this context.
Initialization and parameterization of weights. Proposition 3.1 and Remark 1 reveal that both
LinOSS models exhibit stable dynamics as long as the diagonal weights A in (1) are non-negative.
This condition can easily be fulfilled via many different parameterizations of the diagonal matrix A.
An obvious choice is to square the diagonal values, i.e., a parameterization A = Aˆ Aˆ , with diagonal
matrix Aˆ ∈ R

m×m. Another straightforward approach is to apply the element-wise ReLU nonlinear
activation function to A, i.e., A = ReLU(Aˆ ), with ReLU(x) = max(0, x) and Aˆ as before. The
latter results in a LinOSS model where specific dimensions can be switched off completely by setting
the corresponding weight in Aˆ to a negative value. Due to this flexibility, we decide to focus on the
ReLU-parameterization of the diagonal weights A in this manuscript.

6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

After discussing the parameterization of A, the next step is to determine an appropriate method for
initializing its weights prior to training. Since we already know from Remark 1 that all absolute
eigenvalues of the hidden matrix MIMEX of LinOSS-IMEX are exactly one, the specific values of
A are irrelevant for the model to learn long-range interactions. However, according to Proposition
3.1, A highly influences the eigenvalues of the hidden matrix MIM of LinOSS-IM (4). As discussed

in the previous section, high powers of the absolute eigenvalues of the hidden matrix are of partic-
ular interest when learning long-range interactions. To this end, we have the following Proposition

concerning the expected powers of absolute eigenvalues for LinOSS-IM.
Proposition 3.2. Let {λj}
2m
j=1 be the eigenspectrum of the hidden-to-hidden matrix MIM of the
LinOSS-IM model (4). We further initialize Akk ∼ U([0, Amax]) with Amax > 0 for all diagonal
elements k = 1, . . . , m of A in (2). Then, the N-th moment of the magnitude of the eigenvalues are
given as,

E(|λj |
N ) = (∆t
2Amax + 1)1− N
2 − 1

∆t
2Amax(1 −
N
2
)
, (8)

for all j = 1, . . . , 2m, with k = j mod m.
The proof, detailed in Appendix Section E.2, is a straight-forward application of the law of
the unconscious statistician. Proposition 3.2 demonstrates that while the expectation of |λi
|
N
might be much smaller than 1, it is still sufficiently large for practical use-cases. For instance,
even considering ∆t = Amax = 1 and an extreme sequence length of N = 100k still yields
E(|λj |
N ) = 1/49999 ≈ 2 × 10−5

. Based on this and the fact that the values of A do not af-
fect the eigenvalues for LinOSS-IMEX, we decide to initialize A according to Akk ∼ U([0, 1]) for

both LinOSS models, while setting ∆t = 1.
3.2 UNIVERSALITY OF LINOSS WITHIN CONTINUOUS AND CAUSAL OPERATORS
While trainability is an important aspect of learning long-range interactions, it does not demonstrate
why LinOSS is able to express complex mappings between general (i.e., not necessarily oscillatory)
input and output sequences. Therefore, in this section we analyze the approximation power of our
proposed LinOSS model. Following the recent work of Lanthaler et al. (2024) we show that LinOSS
is universal within the class of continuous and causal operators between time-series. To this end, we
consider a full LinOSS block,

z(t) = Wσ(Wy  ̃ (t) + b ̃), (9)

with weights W ∈ R
q×m ̃
, W ̃ ∈ R
m ̃ ×m, bias b ̃ ∈ R
m ̃
, element-wise nonlinear activation function

σ (e.g., tanh or ReLU), and solution y(t) of the LinOSS differential equations (2).
Based on this, we are now interested in approximating operators Φ : C0([0, T]; R
p
) →

C0([0, T]; R
q
) with the full LinOSS model (9), where
C0([0, T]; R
p
) := {u : [0, T] → R
p
|t 7→ u(t) is continuous and u(0) = 0},
i.e., operators between continuous time-varying functions with values in R
p
. As pointed out in
Lanthaler et al. (2024), the condition u(0) = 0 is not restrictive and can directly be generalized to
the case of any initial condition u(0) = u0 ∈ R
p

simply by introducing an arbitrarily small warm-
up phase [−t0, 0] with t0 > 0 of the oscillators to synchronize with the input signal u. In addition

to these function spaces, we pose the following conditions on the underlying operator Φ,
1. Φ is causal, i.e., for any t ∈ [0, T], if u, B ∈ C0([0, T]; R
p
) are two input signals, such

that u|[0,t] ≡ B|[0,t]

, then Φ(u)(t) = Φ(B)(t).

2. Φ is continuous as an operator
Φ : (C0([0, T]; R
p
), ∥ · ∥L∞) → (C0([0, T]; R
q
), ∥ · ∥L∞),

with respect to the L∞-norm on the input-/output-signals.
Theorem 3.3. Let Φ : C0([0, T]; R
p
) → C0([0, T]; R
q
) be a causal and continuous operator. Let

K ⊂ C0([0, T]; R
p
) be compact. Then for any ε > 0, there exist hyperparameters m, m ̃ , diagonal

weight matrix A ∈ R

m×m, weights B ∈ R
m×d
, W ̃ ∈ R
m ̃ ×m, W ∈ R

q×m ̃ and bias vectors

b ∈ R
m, b ̃ ∈ R
m ̃
, such that the output z : [0, T] → R

q of the LinOSS block (9) satisfies,

sup
t∈[0,T]
|Φ(u)(t) − z(t)| ≤ ε, ∀ u ∈ K.

7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

The proof can be found in Appendix Section E.3. The main idea of the proof is to encode the
infinite-dimensional operator Φ with a finite-dimensional operator that makes use of the structure of
the LinOSS ODE system (1), and that can further be expressed by a (finite-dimensional) function.
This theorem rigorously shows that LinOSS can approximate any causal and continuous operator
between continuous time-varying functions with values in R
p
to any desired accuracy.

4 EMPIRICAL RESULTS
In this section, we empirically test the performance of our proposed LinOSS models on a variety of
challenging real-world sequential datasets, ranging from scientific datasets in genomics to practical
applications in medicine. We ensure thereby a fair comparison to other state-of-the-art sequence
models such as Mamba, LRU, and S5.
4.1 LEARNING LONG-RANGE INTERACTIONS
In the first part of the experiments, we focus on a recently proposed long-range sequential benchmark
introduced in Walker et al. (2024). This benchmark focuses on six datasets from the University of
East Anglia (UEA) Multivariate Time Series Classification Archive (UEA-MTSCA) (Bagnall et al.,
2018), selecting those with the longest sequences for increased difficulty. The sequence lengths

range thereby from 400 to almost 18k. We compare our proposed LinOSS models to recent state-of-
the-art sequence models, including state-space models such as Mamba and LRU. Table 1 shows the

test accuracies averaged over five random model initialization and dataset splits of all six datasets
for LinOSS as well as competing methods. We note that all other results are taken from Walker et al.
(2024). Moreover, we highlight that we exactly follow the training procedure described in Walker
et al. (2024) in order to ensure a fair comparison against competing models. More concretely,
we use the same pre-selected random seeds for splitting the datasets into training, validation, and
testing parts (using 70/15/15 splits), as well as tune our model hyperparameters only on the same
pre-described grid. In fact, since LinOSS does not possess any model specific hyperparameters –
unlike competing state-space models such as LRU or S5 – our search grid is lower-dimensional
compared to the other models considered. As a result, the hyperparameter tuning process involves
significantly fewer model instances.
Table 1: Test accuracies averaged over 5 training runs on UEA time-series classification datasets. All

models are trained based on the same hyper-parameter tuning protocol in order to ensure fair com-
parability. The dataset names are abbreviations of the following UEA time-series datasets: Eigen-
Worms (Worms), SelfRegulationSCP1 (SCP1), SelfRegulationSCP2 (SCP2), EthanolConcentration

(Ethanol), Heartbeat, MotorImagery (Motor). The three best performing methods are highlighted in
red1
(First), blue2

(Second), and violet3
(Third).

Worms SCP1 SCP2 Ethanol Heartbeat Motor Avg
Seq. length 17,984 896 1,152 1,751 405 3,000
#Classes 5 2 2 4 2 2
NRDE 83.9 ± 7.3 80.9 ± 2.5 53.7 ± 6.9

3 25.3 ± 1.8 72.9 ± 4.8 47.0 ± 5.7 60.6

NCDE 75.0 ± 3.9 79.8 ± 5.6 53.0 ± 2.8 29.9 ± 6.5

2 73.9 ± 2.6 49.5 ± 2.8 60.2

Log-NCDE 85.6 ± 5.1

3 83.1 ± 2.8 53.7 ± 4.1

3 34.4 ± 6.4

1 75.2 ± 4.6 53.7 ± 5.3
3 64.3
3

LRU 87.8 ± 2.8

2 82.6 ± 3.4 51.2 ± 3.6 21.5 ± 2.1 78.4 ± 6.7

1 48.4 ± 5.0 61.7

S5 81.1 ± 3.7 89.9 ± 4.6

1 50.5 ± 2.6 24.1 ± 4.3 77.7 ± 5.5

2 47.7 ± 5.5 61.8

S6 85.0 ± 16.1 82.8 ± 2.7 49.9 ± 9.4 26.4 ± 6.4 76.5 ± 8.3

3 51.3 ± 4.7 62.0

Mamba 70.9 ± 15.8 80.7 ± 1.4 48.2 ± 3.9 27.9 ± 4.5

3 76.2 ± 3.8 47.7 ± 4.5 58.6

LinOSS-IMEX 80.0 ± 2.7 87.5 ± 4.0

3 58.9 ± 8.1

1 29.9 ± 1.0

2 75.5 ± 4.3 57.9 ± 5.3
2 65.0
2

LinOSS-IM 95.0 ± 4.4

1 87.8 ± 2.6

2 58.2 ± 6.9

2 29.9 ± 0.6

2 75.8 ± 3.7 60.0 ± 7.5
1 67.8
1
We can see in Table 1 that on average both LinOSS models outperform any other model we consider
here by reaching an average (over all six datasets) accuracy of 65.0% for LinOSS-IMEX and 67.8%
for LinOSS-IM. In particular, the average accuracy of LinOSS-IM is significantly higher than the
two next best models, i.e., Log-NCDE reaching an average accuracy of 64.3%, and S6 reaching an
accuracy of 62.0% on average. It is particularly noteworthy that LinOSS-IM yields state-of-the-art
results on the two datasets with the longest sequences, namely EigenWorms and MotorImagery.

8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

4.2 VERY LONG-RANGE INTERACTIONS
In this experiment, we test the performance of LinOSS in the case of very long-range interactions.

To this end, we consider the PPG-DaLiA dataset, a multivariate time series regression dataset de-
signed for heart rate prediction using data collected from a wrist-worn device (Reiss et al., 2019). It

includes recordings from fifteen individuals, each with approximately 150 minutes of data sampled

at a maximum rate of 128 Hz. The dataset consists of six channels: blood volume pulse, electro-
dermal activity, body temperature, and three-axis acceleration. We follow Walker et al. (2024) and

divide the data into training, validation, and test sets with a 70/15/15 split for each individual. After
splitting the data, a sliding window of length 49920 and step size 4992 is applied. As in previous
experiments, we apply the exact same hyperparameter tuning protocol to each model we consider
here to ensure fair comparison. The test mean-squared error (MSE) of both LinOSS models as well
as other competing models are shown in Table 2. We can see that both LinOSS models significantly
outperform all other models. In particular, LinOSS-IM outperforms Mamba and LRU by nearly a
factor of 2. This highlights the effectiveness of our proposed LinOSS models on sequential data
with extreme length.
Table 2: Average test mean-squared error over 5 training runs on the PPG-DaLiA dataset. All models
are trained following the same hyper-parameter tuning protocol in order to ensure fair comparability.
The three best performing methods are highlighted in red1

(First), blue2

(Second), and violet3

(Third).

Model MSE ×10−2
NRDE (Morrill et al., 2021) 9.90 ± 0.97
NCDE (Kidger et al., 2020) 13.54 ± 0.69
Log-NCDE (Walker et al., 2024) 9.56 ± 0.593
LRU (Orvieto et al., 2023) 12.17 ± 0.49
S5 (Smith et al., 2023) 12.63 ± 1.25
S6 (Gu & Dao, 2023) 12.88 ± 2.05
Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2023) 10.65 ± 2.20
LinOSS-IMEX 7.5 ± 0.462
LinOSS-IM 6.4 ± 0.231

4.3 LONG-HORIZON FORECASTING
Inspired by Gu et al. (2021), we test our proposed LinOSS on its ability to serve as a general
sequence-to-sequence model, even with weak inductive bias. To this end, we focus on time-series
forecasting which typically requires specialized domain-specific preprocessing and architectures.
We do, however, not alter our LinOSS model nor incorporate any inductive biases. Thus, we simply
follow Gu et al. (2021) by setting up LinOSS as a general sequence-to-sequence model that treats
forecasting as a masked sequence-to-sequence transformation. We consider a weather prediction
task introduced in Zhou et al. (2021). In this task, several climate variables are predicted into the
future based on local climatological data. Here, we focus on the hardest task in Zhou et al. (2021) of
predicting the future 720 timesteps (hours) based on the past 720 timesteps. Table 3 shows the mean
absolute error for both LinOSS models as well as other competing models. We can see that both
LinOSS models outperform Transformers-based baselines as well as the other state-space models.
4.4 ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS AND ABLATIONS

Our proposed LinOSS model is the result of several design choices, such as the state matrix pa-
rameterization, state matrix initialization, and the numerical value of the discretization timestep ∆t.

In this section, we empirically analyze how these choices affect the performance of LinOSS by
providing ablations and sensitivity studies.

We start by evaluating the performance of LinOSS under different parameterizations and initializa-
tions of the state matrix A. Specifically, we examine LinOSS-IM within the experimental framework

described in Section 4.1. For this analysis, we parameterize A using one of the two approaches pro-
posed in Section 3.1: A = A ̃ A ̃ or A = ReLU(A ̃ ), where A ̃ ∈ R

m×m is a diagonal matrix. The

9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

Table 3: Mean absolute error on the weather dataset predicting the future 720 time steps based on
the past 720 time steps. The three best performing methods are highlighted in red1

(First), blue2

(Second), and violet3
(Third).
Model Mean Absolute Error
Informer (Zhou et al., 2021) 0.731
LogTrans (Li et al., 2019) 0.773
Reformer (Kitaev et al., 2020) 1.575
LSTMa (Bahdanau et al., 2016) 1.109
LSTnet (Lai et al., 2018) 0.757
S4 (Gu et al., 2021) 0.5783
LinOSS-IMEX 0.5081
LinOSS-IM 0.5282

results, presented in Appendix Table 6 show that the ReLU parameterization leads to slightly better
performance on average over all six datasets. However, the squared parameterization yields better
performance on three out of six datasets. Thus, including different state matrix parameterization
choices in the hyperparameter optimization can help achieve improved performance. We further test
the performance of LinOSS-IM using a standard normal random initialization of the state matrix
instead of the uniform initialization. The results of the standard normal initialization of the state
matrix are shown in Appendix Table 6. We can see that this initialization yields similar performance
to a uniform initialization on almost all considered datasets, except the EigenWorms dataset, where
it obtains a lower mean test accuracy and a much higher standard deviation. This indicates that
the performance of LinOSS-IM with a standard normal initialization for the state matrix is highly

sensitive to the random seed used during initialization. This sensitivity arises because normal dis-
tributions do not have bounded support, allowing for the possibility of large matrix entries. These

large entries result in small eigenvalues, which in turn lead to vanishing gradients.
Another natural question in this context concerns the sensitivity of performance to variations in
the timestep ∆t used in the underlying discretization scheme. To investigate this, we train several
LinOSS-IM models using different values of ∆t spanning three orders of magnitude, i.e., ranging
from 10−3
to 1. The average test error, along with the standard deviation, is plotted for three different
datasets in Appendix C.3. We can see that while the choice of ∆t does influence performance, the
variations are not substantial.

Finally, we empirically analyze the roles of dissipation and conservation in LinOSS-IM and LinOSS-
IMEX. As rigorously demonstrated in Section 3.1, LinOSS-IM introduces dissipative terms, whereas

LinOSS-IMEX denotes a conservative system. While our earlier experiments examined the differ-
ences between these models using real-world data, we now focus on their performance for predicting

energy-conserving dynamical systems to highlight their contrasting behaviors. To this end, we sim-
ulate the energy-conserving simple harmonic motion with various initial positions and velocities.

The test error over time for both models is plotted in Appendix Fig. 2. The results show that the er-
ror in LinOSS-IM grows over time, whereas the error in LinOSS-IMEX remains constant. Notably,

by the end of the time interval, LinOSS-IMEX outperforms LinOSS-IM by a factor of more than
8. This stark contrast underscores the fundamental difference between the two models: LinOSS-IM
introduces dissipative terms, making it more effective for dissipative systems, while LinOSS-IMEX,
being fully conservative, excels in energy-conserving systems.
5 CONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduce LinOSS, a state-space model based on harmonic oscillators. We rigor-
ously show that LinOSS produces stable dynamics and is able to learn long-range interactions only

requiring a nonnegative diagonal state matrix. In addition, we connect the underlying ODE system

of the LinOSS model to Hamiltonian dynamics, which, discretized using symplectic integrators, per-
fectly preserves its symmetry of time reversibility. Moreover, we show that LinOSS is a universal

approximator of continuous and causal operators between time-series. Together, these properties en-
able efficient modeling of long-range interactions, while ensuring stable and accurate long-horizon

forecasting. Finally, we demonstrate that LinOSS outperforms state-of-the-art state-space models,
such as Mamba, LRU, and S5.

10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr. Alaa Maalouf (MIT) and Dr. T. Anderson Keller (Harvard
University) for their insightful feedback and constructive suggestions on an earlier version of the
manuscript. This work was supported in part by the Postdoc.Mobility grant P500PT-217915 from
the Swiss National Science Foundation, the Schmidt AI2050 program (grant G-22-63172), and the

Department of the Air Force Artificial Intelligence Accelerator and was accomplished under Coop-
erative Agreement Number FA8750-19-2-1000. The views and conclusions contained in this docu-
ment are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either

expressed or implied, of the Department of the Air Force or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Gov-
ernment is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding

any copyright